Universit y of N ebraska - L incoln
DigitalComm ons@U niversit y of N ebraska - L incoln
Library Philosophy and P ractice (e-journal) Libraries at University of N ebraska-Lincoln
Winter 2-1-2018
Artificial Intelligence( AI) applic ation in Li brary
Systems in I ran: A t axonom y study
Asefeh A semi
University of I sfahan, asemi@e du.ui.ac.ir
Adeleh A semi
Higher Ed ucation Institute of Saf ahan
Follow thi s and a dditional w orks at:https://d igitalcommon s.unl.edu/l ibphilprac
Part of the Comput er Engineering Common s, and the Library and I nfor mation S cience
Common s
Asemi, Asefeh and A semi, Ade leh, "Artificial Intelligence(AI) application in L ibrary Systems in I ran: A t axonom y study " (2018).
Library Ph ilosophy and Practice (e-journal). 1840.
https://d igitalcommon s.unl.edu/l ibphilprac/1840
brought to you by CORE View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
provided by UNL | Libraries 
  
 
Page- 1 - Artificial Intelligence (AI) application  
in Library Systems in Iran: A taxonomy study  
 
1ASEFEH ASEMI , 2ADELEH ASEMI  
 
1 Associate professor, Department of Knowledge  & Information Science, Faculty of Education & Psychology , University of 
Isfahan , Isfahan, Iran. asemi@edu.ui.ac.ir  
2 Assistant Professor, Depa rtment  of Artificial Intelligence, Higher Education Institute of Safahan, Isfahan, Iran. 
ad_asemi@yahoo.com  (Corresponding  Author)
 
Abstract : With introducing and developing AI logic, this science as a branch of computer science could impact 
and improve all sciences which used computer systems. LIS also could get benefit from AI in many areas. This 
paper survey applications of AI in library and information science and introduce the potential of library system 
to apply AI techniques.  Intelligent systems have contributed for many librarian purposes like cataloging, 
indexing, information retrieval, reference, and other purposes.  We applied Explorato ry Factor Analysis (EFA)  as 
a primer method for identification of the most applicable AI techniques categories in LIS.  ESs are the most 
usable intelligent system in LIS which mimic librarian expert’s behaviors to support decision and management. 
AI also c an utilize in many areas such as speech recognition, machine translation and librarian robots.  In this 
study four criteria for the application of AI in the library systems in Iran was considered and it is determined in 
three area included public services, technical services, and management services. Then, degree of development 
these services was studied using taxonomy method.  The results showed that m ost developed Recommender 
Systems (RM) in library systems in Iran and Natural Language Processing (NLP) is the most undeveloped 
criterion .  
 
Index  terms:  Artificial Intelligence  (AI), Expert System  (ES), Recommender Systems (RM), Natural Language 
Processing (NLP),  Data Mining (DM), Library System, Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) .  
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
 AI is the area of computer science focusing on creating machines that can engage on behaviors that 
humans consider intelligent. AI involves following areas of researches: (1) expert system, (2) fuzzy logic, 
(3) artificial neural network, (4) evolutionary a lgorithms, (5) case base reasoning, (6) image processing, 
(7) natural language processing, (8) speech recognition and (9) robotic. These areas are not separate and 
in many intelligent systems at the same time two or more AI techniques are contributed to so lve problem. 
AI techniques or tools has utilized in many areas such business, management, medicine, military and etc. 
Also has developed in using intelligent systems. The Ideas of utilization intelligent system instead of 
classic system in libraries started from 1990. Intelligent library systems utilize AI technologies to provide 
knowledge -based services to library patrons  and staff AI is a broad, complex area of study, which can be 
difficult for non -specialists to understand. Yet, its ultimate promise is to create computer systems that 
rival human intelligence, and this clearly has major implications for librarianship. Different studies are  Artificial intelligence (AI) application  in Library and Information  Science (LIS) 
 
 about AI  applications  in library system such as : descriptive cataloging, technical services, collection 
development, subject indexing, reference services, database searching, and document delivery. Some  
papers deal with the underlying de sign issues of knowledge representation and natural language 
processing. Many authors have previously provided in -depth overviews of AI technologies. There have 
also been several reviews of research and development efforts relevant to librarianship based o n a review 
of major models of human intelligence . It is  conclude d that the following ten factors are most pertinent to 
ES research:  acquisition , automatization , comprehension , memory management , met control , numeric 
ability , reasoning , social competence , verbal perception , and v isual perception  [1]. 
Today with the advent of the computer and 50 years of research into AI programming techniques, the 
dream of smart libraries is becoming a reality. Researchers are creating systems which can mimic 
librarian thought and behavior which never before was possible.  The Basic problem in this research was 
the state of library development in the use of AI in the field of public services, technical services, and 
management services in Iran. Therefore, the qualitative development of these three activities in use of AI 
were studied  based on four criteria . The practical criteria or factors are identified throu gh factor analysis 
method. The practical criteria  include d the use of expert systems / knowledge  systems , intelligent 
decision support systems / recommender  systems , intelligent data mining,  and intelligent natural language 
processing systems is a library  system . Accordingly, the development of these facilities were studied with 
using taxonomy method in th ree areas of public service,  technical services, and management  services  
according to experts  views in Iran.  
 
II. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  (AI) 
 AI is the science and engineering of making intelligent machines, especially intelligent computer 
programs. It is Concerned with the study and creation of computer systems that exhibit some form of 
intelligence: system that learn new concepts and tasks, systems that  can reason and draw useful 
conclusions about the world around us, systems that can understand a natural language or perceive and 
comprehend a visual scene, and systems that perform other types of feat that require human types of 
Intelligence  [2]. 
It is th e Application of Computer and utilization of computer based products and services in the 
performance of different library operations and functions or in the prevision of various services and 
production of output products.  Automation implies degree of mecha nization where the routines and 
receptive jobs or operation are left to be performed by machines with little or no intervention by human 
beings. Lesser the degree of human intervention, greater the degree of automation this does not mean that 
automation do es away with human beings. On the contrary human being sari relieved of routine chores 
giving them more time for task which require their intelligence.   
 
III. INTELLIGENT SYSTEM  (IS) 
Any Computer -based that helps in the task of subject indexing can be thought o f as an ES at least in 
the loosest sense of that term, especially if it helps  ales experienced person to approximate the work of an 
expert indexer and systems that suggest term to indexers,  or correct certain indexer errors, can be  Artificial intelligence (AI) application  in Library and Information  Science (LIS) 
 
 considered to offer at least a modicum of ''intelligence"  [4]. One of the clearest statement relating to the 
scope of AI  is the following :  
 
… Computer programs have been developed which exhibit human - like reasoning, which may be able to learn from their 
mistakes, and which quickly and cleverly perform tasks normally done by scarce and expensive human experts [4].  
 
IV. EXPERT SYTEMS (ESs)  
ESs are computer based systems witch simulate human decision makings. In general they ask question 
from user and take user’s answer as input then explain rational for decision result.  
Building an ES first involves extracting the relevant knowledge from the human expert such 
knowledge is often heuristic in nature. ESs have been used to solve a wide range of problems in domains 
such as medicine, mathematics, engineering, geology, computer science, business, law, defiance, 
education, etc [2]. Some of the requir ements to development of an ESs are included: Expert on the 
problem exist; Experts have the time to dedicate to the project Export system development is possible; 
Experts can articulate their methods; Problem is not too difficult; Problem is not poorly und erstood; 
Problem requires Cognitive Skills only; and results are measurable and can be agreed upon by the experts 
[4]. 
 
V. APPLICATION IS / AI / ES IN THE LIBRARY SYSTEM   
ESs consist of two main elements: knowledge base and inference engine. Knowledge base is 
involving all information needed which human/librarian experts are using them to make decision. This 
information present in knowledge base as fact and rules. ESs can m ake much better decision than 
librarian decision makers because their knowledge base can involve experiences of team of best experts. 
To design rules of knowledge base, the manner of librarian experts to make decision is emulated. The 
rules are consisting two main phases: If phase and then phase. If phase is consisting conditions and then 
phase is consisting results. The only thing which distinguishes ESs from other computer systems is 
inference engine. The inference engine simulates human decision makings based on knowledge base and 
rule base.     
An obvious potential application of ES within libraries is for the selection of book sellers or other 
vendor of library materials carried to its logical conclusion, a system might be developed to select a 
vendor a utomate ethical based on past performance in the supply of publications of a particular type such 
a capability would be especially valuable in the acquisition of material that are less routine -conference 
proceeding. Certain technical report, publications i n certain languages, publications from certain 
countries, and soon  [3]. 
      Other ESs, designed to help library user satisfy their own needs, have also include document - orders 
aid. Systems have also been designed within the library community to aid in t he selection process, 
systems of this type have been discussed by some of the researchers.  
The term "referral system", as used here, relates to systems that & are designed to refer library users 
to information sources likely to provide the answer to a particular question of the factual of "information"  Artificial intelligence (AI) application  in Library and Information  Science (LIS) 
 
 type within the library community more work  has been done on system of this kind than on any other ES. 
The objective of such systems is obvious: to guide library users to a reference suitable source when a 
librarians not available to help them form reference referral system cover knowledge as a who le in  the 
coverage of a general reference library while other are restricted to highly specialized domain  [3]. The 
librarian robot consists of a manipulator, which can recognize and manipulate books, and a mobile 
platform, which can localize itself and na vigate using ambient RFID tags embedded in a floor. AI 
techniques such genetic algorithm, artificial neural network, fuzzy logic or hybrid methods can improve 
librarian robots.  For example JT2FIS is a Java Class Library for Interval Type -2 Fuzzy Inference Systems 
that can be used to build intelligent object -oriented applications. The architecture of the system is 
presented and its object -oriented design is described [11] . It is mentioned that AI is a branch of Science, 
which deals with helping machines, fin ds solutions to complex problems in a more human -like fashion, 
this generally involves borrowing characteristics from human intelligence and applying them as 
algorithms in a computer friendly way. It can use for NLP  and help to search relevant information from 
databases, indexing and to reduce language barrier. In information retrieval process the user can state his 
information requirement in natural language making the searching more easily and fruitful this allows 
users to state complex retrieval language s [2].  
Many activities in the provision of library and information services involve expertise, and thus provide 
application where ES techniques and technology to improve performance. We are using integrated MCDM 
techniques  in different applications [13]. Analysis of the literature on the applications of ESs in LIS yields the 
application areas: Knowledge base indexing [5]; NLP and abstracting [6]; Reference work [7]; 
Cataloguing [7]; Online information retrieval [8] and [2]; Intelligent interface, in partic ular interfaces for 
online information retrieval systems; Subject analysis and representation, including classification, 
indexing and abstracting service; Reference and referral systems; Hypertext and hypermedia; and 
Collection development [2]. In view of the various features of a modern computer system we find that it 
has been applied in several areas: acquisition, cataloguing, serials control and circulation, information 
retrieval, and dissemination, inter library loan, cooperative acquisition and catalog uing have been 
automated in library [3]. For example OSCAL is an online library that helps students trying to learn 
operating system concepts and AICAL is a similar online library with Artificial Intelligence concepts. 
Both these libraries offer graphical animations of operating system and artificial intelligence concepts [9].  
Also, the concept of digital library is utilizing science ES in the process of cataloging and searching 
digital collections. By using this digital library based of ES, users can searc h the collection, reading 
collection, and download the desired collection by online system [10].  We can use system of intelligent 
library retrieval based on data mining. Also DM can use in on -line library system and help to find user's 
information needs. T oday, RM have extend applications in the library systems. They help to end user to 
select suitable keyword/ phrase in information retrieval. Different studies are on the user -centered design 
of a recommender system for library catalogue and other divisions  of the library system.  
 
VI. METHODOLOGY   Artificial intelligence (AI) application  in Library and Information  Science (LIS) 
 
 In general, numerical taxonomy analysis is a great method to grading, classification, and comparison 
of different activities according to the benefit and enjoyment of the activities based on the considered 
criteria . The ability of this method, it is able to do the two works together. The first, it can divided the 
evaluated sets based on the criteria  presented into homogeneous subsets. The second, it can to grade the 
elements and members of each homogeneous subset.   
In this research we used of Taxonomy Method to examine amount of development the library systems in 
Iran in three area: 1. Public Services (PS), 2. Technical Services (TS), and 3. Management Services (MS). 
Previous studies mentioned various AI techniques t o address the above areas. Some of the mentioned 
techniques in literature had different names with the same application in LISs. Therefore, we applied 
Exploratory  Factor A nalysis (EFA) ( Osborne and Costello, 2009 ) to group the techniques with same 
applicat ion. EFA is a statistical method that shows the variability of observed, correlated variables in 
terms of potential groups of variables called factors. For example, it is possible that variations in four 
observed variables mainly reflect the variations in two groups of variables. EFA searches for such relate 
variations to join them as group of variables. Here EFA  is used to identify complex interrelationships 
among AI techniques  and group them  that are part of unified application s in LIS. Finaly four groups of AI 
techniques were identified as criteria for assessment in numerical taxonomy analysis method. The criteria  
(identified AI technique groups)  included: A1. Expert systems / knowledge systems  (ES), A2. Intelligent 
decision sup port systems / recommender systems  (RS) , A3. Intelligent data mining  (DM) , and A4. 
Intelligent natural language processing systems  (NLP) . Figure 3 show the Asemi's model  for library system 
development assessment in using AI.  
 
 
Figure 3. Asemi's Library System Development Assessment Model in using AI  
 
The researchers used of nine degree scale to receive experts view.  
 
During a web -survey, collected experts' viewpoints about their agreements amount with development 
of use of AI in the three areas mentioned based on four  criteria . In the following are presented the 
findings based on the taxonomy steps.  
 
VII. FINDING  
 Artificial intelligence (AI) application  in Library and Information  Science (LIS) 
 
 a. Data matrix  
The options matrix in rows and columns are criteria. Table 1 and 2 respectively show the type of metrics 
and data matrix.  
 
 
b. The standard matrix (synchronize data using formula Z - Score)  
The quantities given in the table is measured by different units. In this case, each of the above matrix 
elements change by the following equation and data matrix convert to standard matrix. Thus different 
units remove and replace with the scale unit.  Table 3 show the standard matrix.  
        i= option                    j= criterion  
= criterion  average j     =Standard Deviation j  
 
Table 3 . Standard Matrix 
 PS TS MS 
ES -1.477 1.201 0.739 
RS 0.369 0.24 0.369 
DM 0.739 -1.201 0.369 
NLP 0.369 -0.24 -1.477 
 
c. Calculate and determine the compound distances between places  
Compound distances between places within a symmetric matrix obtained by the following formula:  
 
a represents first choice option b Represents the second choice option to calculate the distance. Based on 
the above formula, between the pair options should calculate combined distance. For example, we would 
calculate combined distance between option 1 and  option 2. For this purpose, the criterion  value for 
option 1 subtract from the criterion  value for option 2 then the answer to be power of 2.  For the other 
criteria  do the same thing and in the end, sum the collected values for all criteria . Next, we tak e the square 
root from the answers obtained  (Table 4) . 
Table 4. Commercial intervals  
 ES RS DM NLP 
 Artificial intelligence (AI) application  in Library and Information  Science (LIS) 
 
 ES - 2.114 3.289 3.224 
RS 2.114 - 1.488 1.908 
DM 3.289 1.488 - 2.114 
NLP 3.224 1.908 2.114 - 
 
d. The determination of shortest distances (dr) in each row of matrix symmetrical  
At this stage based on the distances matrix, in each row, obtain the shortest distances. Table 5 show dr 
values.  
 
Table 5. dr values  
 shortest distance 
ES 2.114 
RS 1.488 
DM 1.488 
NLP 1.908 
 
e. Calculate distances upper (+ O)  and lower ( -O) to clear homogeneous places  
Options that indicate within the upper limit and lower limit are called homogeneous options. All of the 
options up and down under consideration are eliminated. The interval can be obtained from the following 
equa tion: 
           = Standard Deviation  dr 
 = Average dr            = Standard Deviation dr  
The value of distance is:  Lower: 1.122   Upper: 2.376  
Accordingly, all options that are in this range are homogeneous and present calculations and other options 
will be removed. Homogeneous d ata Matrix is given in Table 6.  
 
Table 6. Homogeneous data matrix1 
 PS TS MS 
ES 3 9 9 
RS 8 7 8 
DM 9 4 8 
NLP 8 6 3 
 
f. Standard matrix of homogeneous options  
                                                           
1 Note: If this matrix with initial data matrix are the same, it means that all options are 
homogeneous . 
 Artificial intelligence (AI) application  in Library and Information  Science (LIS) 
 
 In this stage, we standardize (normalize) data matrix (table 7).  
Table 7. The data matrix matched standard  
  PS TS MS 
ES -1.477 1.201 0.739 
RS 0.369 0.24 0.369 
DM 0.739 -1.201 0.369 
NLP 0.369 -0.24 -1.477 
 
g. Determine the ideal values ( ) of the   homogeneous data standard matrix  
The ideal values are derived from homogeneous data standard matrix.  
If the criterion  is positive: the ideal value is the largest value of that criterion  in homogeneous data 
standard matrix. If the criterion  is negative: The ideal value is the smallest value of that criterion  in 
homogeneous data standard matrix. The following table (8) show the ideal values.  
 
Table 8. The ideal values  
PS TS MS 
0.739 1.201 0.739 
 
h. Calculation of the model of development  () 
Development model is obtained of the following equation.  Table 9 show development model in this 
research.  
 
   = Homogeneous data matrix      = Ideal values  
 
Table 9. Development  Model  
  
ES 2.216 
RS 1.094 
DM 2.43 
NLP 2.669 
 
i. Calculate the degree of development ( ) 
At this stage of development degree of each option is calculated according to the following equation:  
             
 Artificial intelligence (AI) application  in Library and Information  Science (LIS) 
 
 The following table show degree of development of each option and  ranking of them. There is an inverse 
relationship between the degree of development and status of the options. It means that if value of the 
development is less, it is a better option.  
 
Table 10. Ranking  of Development  
  fi Ranking 
ES 0.634 2 
RS 0.313 1 
DM 0.695 3 
NLP 0.763 4 
 
Figure 4 show the values table 10.  
 
Figure 4. Degree  of Development  
 
 
CONCLUSION  
In this paper, by determining the degree of underdevelopment, the AI application development were 
evaluated in varying sizes. In this study, the concepts of "development degree" and "underdevelopment 
rank" of an activity reflects the amount of use AI criteria / facilities. These criteria  called criteria  of library 
systems development in use of AI. Thus, the activity (PS, TS, and MS) which had more use of the AI 
facilities (included ES, RS, DM, and NLP), in comparison than others, called "Developed Service". Also 
the activity that had lower among of these  criteria  and had more distance than to desirable activity, called 
"Undeveloped Service". Based on taxonomy method, the results showed that most developed 
Recommender Systems (RM) in library systems in Iran and Natural Language Processing (NLP) facility 
is the most undeveloped criterion . 
 
REFERENCES  
[1] Charles W. Bailey. Intelligent Library Systems:  Artificial Intelligence Technology and  Library 
Automation Systems ؛.Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1991.  
[2] M. Bavakutty, Muhammed Salih T.K, Mohamed Haneefa K. Research on library computerization . 
New Delhi : Ess Ess , 2006 . 
 Artificial intelligence (AI) application  in Library and Information  Science (LIS) 
 
 [3] Lakshimikant Mishra and Vishnu Srivastva. Automation and networking of libraries:   A manual of 
library management software and Application of computer Technology in libraries . New D ehli: New 
age international,  2008.  
[4] F.W. Lancaster and Amy Warner. Intelligent Technologies in Library and Information Service 
Applications. USA: American Society for Information Science Silver Springs, MD,2001.  
[5] F. Gibb . Knowledge -based indexing in SIMPR: Integration of natural language processing and 
principles of subject analysis in an automated indexing system. Journal of Document and Text 
Management .1993.  1(2): 131 -153. 
[6] A. Morris . The application of expert systems in libraries and information  centres, De Gruyter , 1992.  
[7] R. A. Davies . A. G. Smith, et al. .Expert systems in reference work : The applications of expert 
systems in libraries & information centre: 92 -132. 1992.  
[8] G..Tseng, A. Poulter, et al.  The library and information profession al's guide to the Internet, Library 
Association Publishing , 1996.  
[9] S. S. Kote ; R. Buckley ; and D. Zhang . Additions to the operating system concepts animations library 
and artificial intelligence concepts animations library. Project (M.S., Computer Science) --California 
State University, Sacramento, 2015.  
[10]  D.G.H. Divayana; I.P.W. Ariawan; I. M. Sugiarta; and I.W. Artanayasa. Digital Library of Expert 
System Based at Indonesia Technology University. International Journal of Advanced Research in 
Artificial Intelligence, v4 n3 (20150301): 1 -8. 2015.  
[11] M. Casta ñón-Puga;  J. R. Castr o; J.M.F.lores -Parra;  C.G. Gaxiola -Pacheco; L.G. Mart ínez-Méndez; 
and L.E. Palafox -Maestre . JT2FISA Java Type -2 Fuzzy Inference Systems Class Library for Building 
Object -Oriented Intelligent Applications. Pre sented in 12th Mexican International Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, MICAI 2013, Mexico City, Mexico, November 24 -30, 2013, Proceedings, Part 
II; 204 -215; Berlin, Heidelberg : Springer Berlin Heidelberg : Springer.  
[12] Osborne, J. W., & Costello, A . B. (2009). Best practices in exploratory factor analysis: Four 
recommendations for getting the most from your analysis. Pan -Pacific Management Review, 12(2), 
131-146. 
[13] Asemi , A, Baba , M.S., Asemi, A.  (2013). Intelligent Multi -Criteria Decision Making system for 
Supplier Evaluation . Research Notes in Information Science (RNIS) . 14, June. 
doi:10.4156/rnis.vol14.86  
  
 