 
Intern ational Journal  of Economics and Business Administration  
Volume VIII, Issue  2, 2020    
 pp. 351-364 
 An Artificial Intelligence and NLP based Islamic FinTech 
Model Combining Zakat and Qardh -Al-Hasan  for Countering 
the Adverse Impact of COVID 19 on SME s and Individuals    
Submitted 20/03/20, 1st revision 05/04/20, accepted 25/04/20  
Mohammad Haider  Syed1, Shahnawaz  Khan2,  
Mustafa  Raza  Rabbani3, Yannis  E. Thalassinos4 
Abstract:  
 
Pursose: The ongoing Corona virus (COVID 19) pandemic  has already impacted almost  
everyon e across the globe. The focus has now shifted from spread of the disease to the 
economic consequences it will bring  to the society. The shortage of production will result 
into the shortage of supply and consequently will end as loss of jobs and emp loyment for 
millions of people around the world. Two of the most important section of our society i.e. , 
daily wage laborers and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) will have to bear the major 
burnt of this crisis. The proposed integrated Artificial Intelli gence an d NLP based Islamic 
FinTech Model combining Zakat (Islamic tax) and Qardh -Al-Hasan (benevolent loan) can 
help the economy to minimize the adverse impact of COVID 19 on individuals and SMEs.  
Design/ Methodology /Approach:  The present study explores t he possi bility of Zakat and 
Qardh -Al-Hasan as a financing method to fight the adverse impact of Corona virus on poo r 
individuls  and SMEs. It provides the solution by proposing an Artificial Intelligence and NLP 
based Islamic FinTech Model combining Zakat a nd Qardh -Al-Hasan .     
Findings : The findings of the study reveals that Islamic finance has immense potential to 
fight any kind of situation/pandemic.  Zakat and Qardh -Al-Hasan , if combined together can 
prove to be a deadly combination to fight the adverse effect o f COVID 19.  
Practical Implications:  To be used as an effective way to support individuals and SMEs in 
the period during and after  the pandemic of COVID 19.   
Originality/value : There is no study combining Zakat and Qardh Al -Hasan to fight the 
advers e effect  of poor individuals and SMEs. The study will contribute massively to the 
existing literature and will help the government and civil societies in fighting the economic 
impact of COVID 19 on individuals and SMEs.   
 
Keywords : Artificial Intelligenc e, COVID 19, Islamic FinTech , Zakat , Qardh -Al-Hasan . 
 
JEL codes : G3, G32,  G38.  
Paper Type: Research article.     
 
1College of Computing and Informatics, Saudi Electronic Uniersity, Dammam, Saudi Arabia, 
e-mail:  m.haider@seu.edu.sa     
2Department of Information Technology, University College of Bahrain , Bahrain,  
e-mail: skhan@ucb.edu.bh  
3Department of Finance and Accounting, College of Busines s Administration, Kingdom 
University, Bahrain , e-mail: m.rabbani@ku.edu.bh       
4Adjunct Lecturer, Gu lf University for Science and Technology , Kuwait,  
e-mail: thalas sinos@hotmail.com    An Artificial Intelligence and N LP based Islamic FinTech Model Combining  Zakat and 
Qardh -Al-Hasan for Countering the Adverse Impact of COVID 19 on SMEs and Individual s       
 352 
 
 1. Introduction  
 
The start of this decade and first quarter of 2020 has seen everything. It started with 
the fear of U.S. -Iran war to global pandemic i n the form of Corona v irus (COVID 
19) have pushed the global economy into huge contraction. Covid 19 is a new kind 
of Corona virus which was not found previously in human. The main source of this 
virus is still unknown  but considering the previous experien ces it must have 
trans ferred to the human from animals. Actually it is a large family of disease that 
has common symptoms like, normal cold, flu, cough to more severe disease like 
‘Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome’ (SARS).   With every passing hour the 
adverse impact of this gl obal pandemic Corona virus (COVID 19) is increasing 
manifold. Within just four months after the first case detected in China the economic 
impact of this crisis is already being compared with the global financial crisis of 
2007 -08 and great depression of 19 30s. Just for the comparison the financial crisis 
of 2007 -08 lasted for more than 3 years (Erken , 2012) where as great depression of 
1930s lasted for around a decade (Romer , 1990).  
 
With economies in lock down, closing shops, borders , people being asked t o stay 
indoors and economic activities to a halt the global economy is in shambles and 
looking less healthy. The stock markets are tumbling, central banks are slashing 
interest rate, industrial production are almost zero resulting int o massive job loss and  
a financial crisis is around the corner.  As the writing is on the wall but the amount 
of damage to be done by this pandemic will largely depend on the amount of 
corrective actions the government and employers take today to minimize the 
damage. The employ ers, civil societies and government agencies are required to 
work in coordination to help the affected and minimize the adverse impact of this 
crisis on individuals in SMEs.  
 
2. Impact  of COVID 19 on Poor  Individuals  
 
Though  the death  toll and number  of infected people  from  COVID  19 are mainly  
from  the world ’s most  developed  countries  like, U.S., Italy,  Spain , Germany,  China  
and UK are increasing  every  minute.  It has severely  affected  the world’s  most  
impoverished  countries  despite  their best health  care systems and other  infrastructure  
facilities.  The impact  of this crisis  is projected  to be worse  in underdeveloped  and 
developing  countries  due to lack of adequate  testing  facilities,  lack of accurate  data 
and because  of patients  might  have pre-existing  conditi ons. The ongoing  global  
pandemic  will hit hard the poor and daily  wage  laborers  in these  countries  as it is 
estimated  that 24 million  less people  will escape  poverty  due to this pandemic  
(World Bank, 2020 ). The World Bank further  reports that there  are around 900 
million  people  in the underdeveloped  countries  which  are under  risk due to this 
pandemic.  Here  in this paper  we will not talk about  the number  of death  or measures  
to cure the infected  patients.  Our focus  will be beyond  the number  of infections  and 
death,  we will analyze  the economic  impact  of this pandemic  on individuals  and  M. Haider, S. K han, M.R. Rabbani, Y.E. Thalassinos  
  
353  
SMEs  and how we can use Islamic  finance  tools, Zakat  and Qardh -Al-Hasan , 
combined  with the technology  to fight  this virus  and minimize  the damage  on these 
two important  sectio ns of the society.   
 
It is estimated  that some  regions  if we take the extreme  scenario  the number  of 
people  living  in poverty  could  increase  by 420-580 million  and it is also expected  to 
increase  the global  poverty  to around  0.5 billion which  is around  8% of the total 
world’s  population  (Sumner , 2020).  This situation  has arrived  first time since  1990  
that the global  poverty  is expected  to increase.  Oxfam -a Nairobi  based  charity  
organization  published  a report  on April  10, 2020  and their findings  revealed  that 
this is going  to be an economic  crisis  more  severe  than the financial  crisis  of 2008.  
The global  poverty  is expected  to increase  for the first time in 30 years  after 1990.   
 
The report  further  revealed  that taking  into account  the World  Bank measure  of 
poverty  from  being  1.90$  a day or less to a higher  poverty  line of 5.50$  a day or less, 
under  every  scenario  there  will be a global  contraction  of income  of up to 20% and 
that will lead into a disaster . The number  of people  living  below poverty  line will 
increase  up to 1.2 billion  worldwide  an increase  of 434 million.  Under  the same  
calculation  if other  measure  is taken  into consideration  i.e. the number  of people  
living  below  poverty  line on 5.50$  a day or less. The total global  popul ation  below  
poverty  line will increase  to a whopping  4 billion  an increase  of 548 million  (Oxfem , 
2020).  Considering  the above  statistics  and scenario,  there  is very bleak  chance  that 
the situation  can get any better.  In all probability  the situation  is expected  to get 
worse  only. The only way it can be improved  is that the rich people  and government  
around  the world  should  come  together  and join hands  to help these  deprived  section  
of society.  Islamic  finance  has two of the most  beautiful  tools,  Qardh -Al-Hasan  and 
Zakat , to help ummah  by advancing  cash in this pandemic  situation.  If the Islamic  
finance  tools  are used effectively  with the technology  the Muslim  countries  can save 
the poor individuals . 
 
3. Impact of COVID 19 on SMEs  
 
It is expected  that the coron avirus  pandemic  is going to kill more  the small  business  
than human  being  (Carruthers , 2020).  Knowing  the importance  of Small  and 
Medium  Enterprises,  it is of increasing  importan ce to analyze  the impact  of Covid  
19 on SMEs  and find out the measures  to help them  in survival.  In UK, it is revealed  
that the most  organizations  can be categorized  as small  on the basis  of employee  
number.  95 percent  of business  have  employed  less than 10 people  and of course  
when  compared  to the profit  and turnover  the data is skewed  the other  way (Day, 
2000).  SMEs  are the backbone  of the economy  whether  you talk about  the economy  
of a random  state or the word  economy.  Most  of the world  economy  have achieved  
the high level  of development  due to the contribution  from  SMEs,  for exam ple, 
Taiwan,  China  and Japan  have  achieved  high industrial  growth  due to the 
contribution  from  their dynamic  SMEs  (Pandya , 2012).  SMEs  provided  the valuable  
inputs  to the society  in terms  of contribution  in GDP,  generating  employment,  An Artificial Intelligence and N LP based Islamic FinTech Model Combining  Zakat and 
Qardh -Al-Hasan for Countering the Adverse Impact of COVID 19 on SMEs and Individual s       
 354 
 
 providing  goods  for the local  demand  and adjusting  the quality  of goods  and services  
asper  the local  demand.  The contribution  of SME  in invaluable  to world  economy  
and it is beyond  the scope  of this research  to describe  (Robe , 2013).   
 
The SMEs  contribute  massively  to the GDP  and employment  generat ion, the 
contribution  to GDP  from  SME  comes  around  52-57%,  where  as it contributes  to the 
61% of employment  in developing  countries  (Abor , 2010).  According  to the world  
bank  report  in 2020  the SME s contribute  around  40% to the GDP,  it contributes  
around  90% of the total businesses  where  as it 50% jobs worldwide  are coming  from  
the SME s. SMEs  are more  important  and have  more  relevance  in Islamic  countries  
as there  are 53.2 SMEs  in Islamic  countries  as compare  to the global  average  of 25.2 
per 1000  population  (IDB , 2020).   
 
The SMEs  are in urgent  need  of funds  due to the global  pandemic  COVID  19. There  
is travel  ban all around  the world,  complete  lockdown,  no movement  of goods  and 
services,  industries  like, tourism  and hotel s are in compl ete disarray.  Most  of the 
SMEs  are battling  for the survival  as it has become  really  difficult  for them  to bear 
the operating  expenses  like, paying  salary  and rent. It has become  the question  of 
survival  for them  as most  of the SMEs  are having  very small  capital  and they can 
sustain  for very long if the situation  continues  for some  more  time.   
 
4. Zakat as a Financing Tool during COVID 19  
 
Zakat  is one of the five pillars  of Islam  along  with the Shahadah,  (Belief  that Allah  
is on and there  is no one except  Allah to worship)  Salah , (Muslims  are required  to 
worship  Allah,  five times  a day),   Sawm  (Muslims  are required  to fast during  the 
month  of Ramadan,  and Hajj (an annual  Islamic  pilgrimage  to holy city of Makkah).  
Zakat  literally  means  ‘that  which  purifies’.  All the Muslims  who are eligible  to pay 
must  pay minimum  2.5%  of their wealth  every  year to the poor,  needy,  destitute  and 
others.  Zakat  is a compulsory  charity  tool is Islamic  finance  that can be used for 
various  purposes,  mainly  for eradicating  the povert y from  Muslim  communit y. Holy  
Quran  has mentioned  at least eight  application  of Zakat,  but there  is general  
consensus  that the most  important  application  of Zakat  can be for the eradication  of 
poverty  by paying  it to the needy  and poor (Hasan , 2010).   Zaka t is an important  part 
of Islam  as Allah  has mentioned  more  than 30 times  in Holy  Quran  about  Zakat .  
 
Allah  says in Surah  Al-Maida , Verse  12. “Allah  says,  I am with those  who prays  to 
Allah,  pays Zakat  and believe  in my messenger.  Allah  further  says in the same  Surah  
that, I will honor  and assist  them  and lend a good  loan to Allah  and I will erase  their 
sins and take them  to the Jannah  (paradise)  where  there  are gardens  and rivers  
flowing.  If any of you disbelieved,  it means  he has gone  away  from  the straight 
path”. (Surah  Al-Maida,  Verse  12). 
 
 M. Haider, S. K han, M.R. Rabbani, Y.E. Thalassinos  
  
355  
5. Scope of Zakat for Helping Poor and Poverty Alleviation during 
COVID 19 Pandemic  
 
As mentioned  earlier  there  are eight  application s of Zakat  mentioned  in Holy  Quran  
and five of those  application s are related  to the poverty  alleviation.  To help the poor 
is the basic  teaching  of Islam.  Helping  the poor people  in this difficult  time will 
bring  two benefits  to the wealthy  or rich people  as it will purify  their wealth  and 
heart  from  greed  as promised  by Allah  and it will also contribute  in the economic  
growth  of the country  (Embng , 2013).  Keeping  all other  objective s of paying  Zakat,  
the most  important  of them  is to help the poor and needy  to attain  the minimum  
standard  of life (Abu  Bakar , 2011).  Due to the COVID  19, the poor’s  and daily  wage  
earners  are in urgent  need  of funds  and those  people  who are eligible  to pay Zakat  
and also the Zakat  houses  and Zakat  collection  centers  can use this money  to help 
the poor and needy  during  this difficult  time.   
 
6. Zakat as a Financing Tool for SMEs during C OVID 19 Pandemic  
 
Distribution  of Zakat  is a very important  and one should  be very careful  as it cannot  
be given  to every  business.  It can only be given  to those  businesses  who are eligible  
for it asper  the rules  laid down  by the sharia. There  is various  application  of Zakat  
mentioned  in Holy  Quran  and as practiced  by the Zakat  institutions  and rich and 
wealthy  individuals.  One of the most  widely  used application  of Zakat  is the 
distribution  of Zakat  money  to the needy  people  in the form of business  capital  as a 
source  of Islamic  micro  financing  (Ibrahim , 2014).  Zakat  can be given  to the SME  
and it has shown  positive  correlation  between  the Zakat  and business  development  
of SME s in Malaysia  (Sukestri , 2018).  However,  it is concluded  here that while  
paying  Zakat to the SME s one should  be very careful  and should  check  that while  
paying  Zakat  the recipient  shall  not become  the Sahib -Al-Nisab  (The  owner  of 
wealth  valuing  equal  to 52.5 tola silver).   
  
7. Qardh Al -Hasan (QH) as a Financing Tool during COVID 19  Pandem ic 
 
Qardh  Al-Hasan  is the non interest  or benevolent  loan or non-margin  loan practiced  
since  the era of Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  ﷺ. It is one of the most  beautiful  financing  
tool available  in Islamic  finance.  Qardh -Al-Hasan  is a loan given  by the first party  to 
the second  party  without  expectation  of any reward.  It is served  as a bailout  fund for 
a short  period  of time (Hannanong , 2018).  As objective  of Islamic  finance  is the 
removal  of poverty  and eradicating  the inequality  of income.  Qardh -Al-Hasan  is 
served  as one of the most  important  tool in Islamic  finance.  Qardh -Al-Hasan  
financing  is a traditional  financing  method  in Islamic  finance  and it has its relevance  
even  today  in modern  world  and if applied  properly  it can help the SME s sector  in 
fighting  this pandemic.  Allah  has mentioned  Qardh -Al-Hasan  on six occasions  
(Q2:245,  Q5:12,  Q57:11,  Q57:18,  Q64:17,  Q73:20).  At one of the occasions  Allah  
says that (Surah  Al-Baqarah,  verse  No. 245).   An Artificial Intelligence and N LP based Islamic FinTech Model Combining  Zakat and 
Qardh -Al-Hasan for Countering the Adverse Impact of COVID 19 on SMEs and Individual s       
 356 
 
 “Who is it that would  loan Allah  a goodly  loan so He may multiply  it for him many  
times  over?  And it is Allah  who withholds  and grants  abundance,  and to Him you 
will be returned”.  Explanation:  The above  verses  of Holy  Qura’an  can be interpreted  
as- Qardh -Al-Hasan  means  lending  money  to the individuals  or organization  without  
interest.  As Allah  has promised  that you will be rewarded  on the day of judgement.  
The word  ‘Kaseera’  is used everywhere  which  means  ‘more  and more’.  Of course,  
Allah  is the one who gives  more  and more  and if Allah  starts  giving  the reward,  
there  is no limit  to it (Mirakhor , 2007).   
 
8. Scope of Qardh -Al-Hasan (QH) for Helping Poor and Poverty 
Alleviation during COVID 19 Pandemic  
 
The central  objective  of Islamic  finance  is to achieve  social  justice,  eradication  of 
poverty  and overall  welfare  of the society.  Islamic  finance  principles  are based  on 
the objective  of helping  the last man standing  in the queue  (Munner . 2019).  Qardh -
Al-Hasan along  with the Zakat  and Sadaqah  are the Islamic  finance  tools to help the 
poor and needy.  This can prove  to be an effective  tool in this grave  situation  of 
COVID  19. As explained  earlier  COVID  19 has brought  disaster  for the poor and 
Islamic  countries  and Muslims  in the other  countries  must  use Qardh -Al-Hasan  to 
help the needy  and poor.  It is the duty of the society  to ensure  that poor including  
women  are empowered  (Rabbani , 2020b ; Rabbani,  2020d ).  
 
The importance  of Qardh -Al-Hasan  is more  than Zakat  in the sense  that there  are 
many  people  who are not eligible  for Zakat  because  their wealth  is above  the 
prescribed  minimum  limit  for accepting  Zakat  and these  people  can easily  accept  the 
Qardh-Al-Hasan . The Qardh -Al-Hasan  has zero cost of borrowing  and individuals  
who need  money  can fight  this situation  of COVID  19 and restore  their previous  
position  and can later repay  the loan.  It is proved  that the Qardh -Al-Hasan  financing  
is an effective  tool in empowering  the economic  activities  of the poor and needy  
(Widyanto , 2011).  Qardh -Al-Hasan  is the tool to reinforce  the social  integrity,  
cooperation  and harmony.  It can be always  used to help the needy  and power  to 
empower  them  and help them  in times  of need  (Iqbal , 2015).   
 
9. Scope of Qardh -Al-Hasan (QH)  for Financing the SMEs during COVID 
19 Pandemic  
 
One the biggest difference between Zakat  and QH is that Zakat  cannot be accepted 
by everyone or everyone is not entitled to receive Zakat  where as QH can be 
accepted by anyone who is in need of fund whether rich or  poor. It has been 
observed that the QH loan has completely been ignored by the Islamic banks as 
financing tool for SMEs. There are various sources of fund which can be used by the 
government and Islamic banks to provide QH loan to the SMEs. As COVID 19 is  a 
temporary phenomenon and most of the countries have already announced the 
stimulus package to help their countries in fighting the adversities of COVID 19. 
The money from these package can be used to finance the SMEs by giving QH loan M. Haider, S. K han, M.R. Rabbani, Y.E. Thalassinos  
  
357  
(Saquib , 2011). As  it will increase the customer satisfaction and customer 
satisfaction will result into the customer loyalty (Rabbani , 2016). The banks and 
Islamic financial institutions can use their capital to finance the SME s in this crisis 
time by giving QH loan and i t will also not affect their liquidity as they are expected 
to be paid soon. Another source of finance for giving the QH loan could be the 
charity amount received by the Islamic bank during Murabaha  financing. These 
funds are earmarked and cannot be used fo r any other purpose, but with the 
permission from client the banks can use this fund during this pandemic to bail out 
the SMEs from getting bankrupt (Usmani , 2008).  
  
10. Zakat and Qar dh-Al-Hasan Platform  
 
Zakat  platform requires that each user of the system m ust be registered with the 
Zakat  platform. There are three types of users who acts as audience of the Zakat  and 
Qard h-Al-Hasan  platform, first type of the users are the people or organization who 
are willing to support others by offering Qard h-Al-Hasan  or by Zakat,  as discussed 
earlier, henceforth, this type of users are called lender in our system. The second 
type of users are the individuals or small and medium enterprises (SMEs) which are 
in great need of funding because of some crisis such as due to som e kind of natural 
disaster such as pandemic, flood, war or other similar kind of situation. This type of 
organizations or individuals usually belong to the category of self -reliant but 
because of some external forces such as war and natural disasters etc ., which are 
beyond the control of an individual or SMEs. Zakat platform classifies these users as 
borrowers and henceforth, this research study will use the same term. The other 
category of the users is those who are less fortunate or underprivileged and ar e in 
need of support from others to fulfill basic requirements. The Zakat  system classifies 
this category of users as eligible Zakat receiver and this research will use the same 
term henceforth. The following Figure  1 illustrates the working of the Zakat 
platform.  
 
Each user must provide an agreement of Sharia compliance to activate his/her 
account on Zakat  platform. The lenders have to provide the information that the 
funds which they are going to use for the support have been earned through those 
sources which are permissible under Sharia law. Similarly, the borrowers and the 
eligible Zakat receiver also have to provide the sharia compliance agreement stating 
that the use of the support funds will be used for the activities which are permissible 
under Shar ia law. Borrower and Zakat receiver provide the proof of their needs. 
These proofs can be in the form of textual information and/or media (audio/video). 
The Zakat  systems use various technologies for processing of this information to 
support the verificati on of the needs and c lassify  them into valid or invalid 
categories. If the system classifies the need into invalid category, it is ignored and 
will not reviewed by the system again until requested by the Zakat representative. 
However, if the request is cla ssified as the valid category, it is reviewed by the Zakat  
platform representative.  
 An Artificial Intelligence and N LP based Islamic FinTech Model Combining  Zakat and 
Qardh -Al-Hasan for Countering the Adverse Impact of COVID 19 on SMEs and Individual s       
 358 
 
 Figure 1.  Zakat Model  
 
Source:  Own.  
 
The system uses machine learning, natural language process (NLP) and digital 
image processing techniques for the analysis of the information provided by the 
borrower or by the Zakat receiver. The text documents are processed using natural 
language processing techniques to retrieve the important information from the 
proofs of need document. The retrieved infor mation is used by the Zakat 
representative to verify the needs and classify them into appropriate category. Zakat 
platform applies a hybrid approach of natural language process using various 
techniques in different modules. Hybrid approach uses combination  of different 
techniques used for natural language processing.  
 
Some examples of various techniques used in machine translation application 
domain of NLP are statistical approach es in which the model is built around the 
Bayesian probability theorem (Shahn awaz, 2013b), artificial neural network based 
approach which is one of the most popular approach nowadays as the use of deep 
learning is increasing (Khan, 2011; Mishra, 2012; Khan, 2019a ), rule -based methods 
(Shahnawaz, 2013a), case -based reasoning approac h which consider s the previously 
available data as the case base for processing future incoming information 
(Shahnawaz, 2015) and many more.  
 
Repayments  Borrowed Funds  Supportive Funds 
Type Selection  Sharia Compliant 
Agreement  Sharia Compliant 
Agreement  
Needs & Profiles  
Proof  
of Need  Zakat Platform  Verified Nee ds Lender  
Zakat Payment  
Borrower  Eligible Zakat 
Receiver  
 M. Haider, S. K han, M.R. Rabbani, Y.E. Thalassinos  
  
359  
However the textual information received from the borrowers sometimes is not 
available in proper grammatical stru cture, therefore, NLP techniques are applied for 
getting the proper information because for the efficiency of the NLP algorithms the 
input provided to most of these algorithms must be in proper structure specifically 
for those algorithms which generates a parse tree for extracting the information from 
the input documents (Khan, 2018; Shahnawaz, 2011). The proposed system can also 
be developed for automatic assessment of the images and getting the preliminary 
information from the images and videos (Bashir, 2 017). The researchers are working 
in the direction of developing a chatbot for the integration on Zakat platform which 
will be available online for the automatic response of the user queries (Khan, 2020 ; 
Khan, 2020b ).  
 
However, building a chatbot requires  a lot of information as the knowledge base so 
that it can understand the semantic meaning of the text to respond them by 
understanding their sentiments (Khan , 2019b ; Astya, 2017). The above process of 
information generation is very similar and can be cons idered similar to a decision 
support system as the capability and functionality are almost identical. The Zakat 
representative examines the needs based on the information generated by the Zakat 
platform and approved to be published for the Zakat  users.  
 
The lender can search from their dashboard any of the published profile of needs and 
select as the beneficiary to receive the support. The lenders also have access to the 
verified proof of need information provided by the borrowers. Zakat  system 
recommends the information of possible beneficiaries based on the past supporting 
history of the lenders and if they have set any interests in the dashboard for the 
support. If none of the information is available to the lenders, in that case, of the 
proposed system,  the Zakat  platform recommends the list of the beneficiaries. These 
recommendations are based on the type of support selected by the lenders and are 
generated using artificial intelligence -based recommender system. If the lenders 
select the Zakat as the ty pe of support then the list of the beneficiaries will contain 
the needs of eligible Zakat  receivers and if the lenders selects the Qard h-Al-Hasan  
support then the list will contain the information for the borrowers.  
 
The lenders on the Zakat platform can directly transfer the funds to the beneficiaries. 
In some cases, if the beneficiaries does not have a linked bank account with the 
proposed platform then the funds are received by the Zakat  system and are put into 
the wallet, the Zakat representatives then  makes the arrangement for the transfer of 
the funds to the intended beneficiary and funds are delivered. The Zakat 
representative provides the contact information once the beneficiary has been 
contacted by the Zakat  representative to make sure the selecte d beneficiary by the 
representative is the intended beneficiary to whom the lender wanted to support. On 
delivery of the funds, the lender is given the information about the fund transfer with 
the contact information of the receiver for the confirmation an d the funds are 
removed from the wallet. All the transactions are recorded to maintain the history so 
that if the borrower wants to repay the Qard h-Al-Hasan , there will be no An Artificial Intelligence and N LP based Islamic FinTech Model Combining  Zakat and 
Qardh -Al-Hasan for Countering the Adverse Impact of COVID 19 on SMEs and Individual s       
 360 
 
 discrepancies related to the amount of funds received or repaid. The transaction 
history of the eligible Zakat receiver is maintained to observe how it has uplifted the 
status of the Zakat receiver and how much Zakat a user has received, the Zakat 
receiver s are listed in the increasing order of Zakat amount received by a 
beneficiary.  
 
The Zakat receivers who have received least amount of the Zakat will be on the top 
of the list. This information helps the lenders to make the decision. In the similar 
way, the transaction records or history of the borrowers is also maintained, recorded 
and accessible to the lenders which the lenders can analyze to make decision how 
much and why they want to support the borrowers and can also agree to terms and 
conditions of repayment with the borrowers. As discussed earlier, Qard h-Al-Hasan  
is a type of fu nd which is considered as one of the highest forms of charity under 
Sharia law. Therefore, it is up to the lenders to discuss these terms and conditions of 
repayments. The proposed Zakat  system is an Islamic FinTech model which works 
as the platform to bri ng all the parties together and ease the way in which these 
services can be provided. The research studies in ( Rabbani , 2020a; Rabbani, 2020c) 
suggest that Islamic FinTech can provide the solution of many obstacles in 
efficiently executing the services and  obligation of the Sharia law  and create 
innovative pathways to implement some of the most important finance related duties 
applicable to the Muslim community. Therefore, the proposed Zakat platform can be 
a revolutionary step in the direction of solving the issues related to transparency, 
speed of support delivery service and fair distribution of Zakat. 
 
11. Discussion  
 
Based on the presentation above , it can be discussed that Islamic finance have the 
capability to counter the threats arisen because of crisis  situations like COVID -19. 
Zakat and Qard h-Al-Hasan  are two concepts in Sharia law which can be a valuable 
solution in this kind of situations. Zakat  is one of the key pillars of Islamic principles 
and it is obligatory for every Muslim to pay Zakat.  The im plementation of these 
concepts of Islamic Finance with technology using artificial intelligence and natural 
language processing makes it easier to reach to a wider range of audience as web -
based platform can reach the people across the globe.  
 
In this res earch study, the researchers have presented a novel model for 
implementing these Islamic finance concepts on web -based platform using artificial 
intelligence and natural language processing, however, other supporting 
technologies for building the online ve rsion of the platform have not be discussed as 
those are not in the scope of this research study. The novel ZaQaH  platform has 
three major modules. First module is the information generation module which 
process the proof of need information provided by th e beneficiaries. The information 
provided in the form of textual and media data as the documents of proofs of need is 
processed with AI and NLP to generate the key information which helps the ZaQaH 
representatives in the decision making process for identif ying a valid or invalid M. Haider, S. K han, M.R. Rabbani, Y.E. Thalassinos  
  
361  
need. This module of the ZaQaH  platform functions similar to a decision support 
system.  
 
The second module of the system is the recommender system which helps in 
generating the potential list of the beneficiaries for the lenders. T he proposed Islamic 
Fintech system ZaQaH,  uses natural language processing and artificial intelligence -
based recommender system to suggest the list of the envisioned interested parties. 
Artificial intelligence and NLP also facilitate in the process of veri fying the needs of 
the beneficiaries. The third module is the facilitator module which maintains the 
record of transactions and provide functionality of communication. As the research 
studies in ( Rabbani , 2020a; Rabbani , 2020c) suggest that Islamic FinTech  can 
provide the solution of many obstacles in efficiently executing the services and 
obligation of the Sharia law  and create innovative pathways to implement some of 
the most important finance related duties applicable to the Muslim community. 
Based on t he above discussion it can be considered that the proposed system may be 
a revolutionary step in implementing the Zakat and Qard h-Al-Hasan principles of 
Sharia law.  
 
12. Conclusion   
 
From all above it can be concluded that it is very early to exactly estimate the exact 
amount of damage to be do ne by the global pandemic COVID 19. The views from 
experts shows the poor individuals and SMEs are going to be worst hit by the 
COVID 19. Like always, Islamic finance is the complete way of life and it provides 
an effecti ve tool in terms of Zakat and Qardh -Al-Hasan  to not only help these two 
important section s of society but also minimize the damages on them. Now, it is the 
responsibility of the government, civil societies and rich individuals to use these 
Islamic financin g tool s and provide the benefit to the poor individuals as well as to 
the SMEs.  
 
The study proposed an Artificial Intelligence and NLP based Islamic FinTech Model 
combining Zakat  and Qardh -Al-Hasan  for countering the adverse impact of COVID 
19 on SMEs and  individuals’ can prove to be a stepping stone in this direction. The 
model uses the Artificial Intelligence and NLP to make the system more effective 
and transparent. Islamic finance must be combined with the technology to increase 
its reach and to achiev e the broader objective of social justice and providing quality 
life to each and every Muslim across the globe. It is further reassured that the QH 
and Zakat  must be used with technology to achieve the objective of Islam and 
Islamic finance, i.e. , to treat  every member of Ummah  as brother s and sisters and 
reach to them with right intention in terms of pandemic like COVID 19 and Allah is 
the best to judge the intention and give the reward.   
 
 
 
 An Artificial Intelligence and N LP based Islamic FinTech Model Combining  Zakat and 
Qardh -Al-Hasan for Countering the Adverse Impact of COVID 19 on SMEs and Individual s       
 362 
 
 References:  
 
Abor, J., Quartey, P. 2010. Issues in SME developm ent in Ghana and South  
Africa.  International research journal of finance and economics,  39(6), 215 -228. 
Astya, P. 2017. Sentiment analysis: approaches and open issues. International Conference on  
Computing, Communication and Automation (ICCCA), 154 -158. IEEE, DOI: 
10.1109/CCAA.2017.8229791 . 
Bakar, M.H.A., Abdghani, A.H.  2011. Towards achieving the quality of life in the  
management of Zakat distribution to the rightful recipients (the poor and 
needy).  International Journal of Business and Social Science,  2(4).  
Bashir, T ., Imran , U., Shahnawaz , K., Junaid , Ur.R. 2017. Intelligent reorganized discrete  
cosine transform for reduced reference image quality assessment.  Turkish Journal of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences , 25(4), 2660 -2673.  
Carruthers , P. 2020. How Coronavirus can kill small businesses: COVID -19. Personal  
Finance,  (471), 8 -10. 
Day, J. 2000. Commentary –the value and importance of the small firm to the world  
economy.  European Journal of Marketing , 34 (9/10, 1033 -1037 . 
Erkens, D.H., Hun g, M., Matos, P. 2012. Corporate governance in the 2007 –2008 financial  
crisis: Evidence from financial institutions worldwide.  Journal of corporate 
finance,  18(2), 389 -411. 
Hannanong, I., Aris, A. 2018. Al -Qardh-Al-Hasan: Soft and Benevolent Loan Pada Ban k  
Islam.  DIKTUM , Jurnal Syariah dan Hukum,  16(2), 171 -182.  
Hassan, M.K., Ashraf, A. 2010. An integrated poverty alleviation model combining zakat,  
awqaf and micro -finance. In  Seventh International Conference –The Tawhidic 
Epistemology: Zakat and Waqf Eco nomy, Bangi, Malaysia , 261-281. 
Ibrahim, P., Ghazali, R. 2014. Zakah as an islamic micro -financing mechanism to productive  
zakah recipients.  Asian Economic and Financial Review,  4(1), 117.  
Iqbal, Z., Shafiq, B. 2015. Islamic finance and the role of Qard -al-Hassan (Benevolent  
Loans) in enhancing inclusion: A case study of AKHUWAT.  ACRN , Oxford 
Journal of Finance and Risk Perspectives,  4(4), 23 -40. 
Islamic Development Bank . 2020. President of the Islamic Development Bank Group:  
Covid -19 and Micro, Small an d Medium Enterprises, Saving the Global Economy 
from the Pandemic: Available at : https://www.isdb.org/news/president -of-the-
islamic -development -bank -group -covid -19-and-micro -small -and-medium -
enterprises -saving -the-global -economy -from -the-pandemic . Accessed on 4 April . 
Khan, S. , Rabbani, M.R. 2020a. Artificial  Intelligence and NL P based Chatbot as Islamic  
Banking and Finance Expert . International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics and Natural Language Processing (CLNLP 2020), Seoul, South Korea 
on July 20 -22.  
Khan, S ., Imran , U. 2019a. A model for English to urdu an d hindi machine translation  
system using translation rules and artificial neural network. Int. Arab J. Inf. Technol. 
16(1), 125-131. 
Khan, S ., Mishra , B.R. 2011.  Translation rules and ANN based model for English to Urdu  
machine translation. INFOCOMP 10,  3, 36-47. 
Khan, S. , Rabbani, M.R.  2020 b. Artificial Intelligence and NLP based Chabot as Islamic  
Banking and Finance Expert . International Journal of Information Retrieval 
Research (IJIRR), Special Issue on Optimization and Convergence of Machine 
Learning A lgorit hms for Leveraging IoT, Block chain and Artificial Intelligence . 
 M. Haider, S. K han, M.R. Rabbani, Y.E. Thalassinos  
  
363  
Khan, S ., Thirunavukkarasu , K. 2019b. Indexing Issues in Spatial Big Data Management.  
Available at SSRN 3387792.  
Khan, S ., Usama , M., Salam , S.S., Sultan , A. 2018. Translat ion Divergen ce Pat terns  
Handling in English to Urdu Machine Translation. International Journal on Artificial 
Intelligence Tools , 27(5), 1850017.  
Mirakhor, A. , Iqbal, Z.  2007 . Qard hasan microfinance (QHMF) . New Horizon, Global  
Perspective on Islamic Bank ing and Fina nce, No. 164, 1-20. 
Mishra, R.B. 2012. A neural network based approach for English to Hindi machine  
translation. International Journal of Computer Applications 53,  18, 50-56. 
Muneer, F., Khan, F. 2019. Qard -Al-Hassan as a Tool for Poverty Alle viation a Case of Fael  
Khair Waqf Program in Bangladesh.  Journal of Islamic Monetary Economics and 
Finance,  5(4), 829 -848. 
Oxfem . 2020. Coronavirus impact: COVID -19 may push half million people into poverty,  
says Oxfam ; Available at : https://www.oxfam.org/en/oxfams -response -covid -19. 
Accessed on 16 April, 2020.  
Pandya, V.M. 2012. Comparative analysis of development of SMEs in developed and  
developing countries. International Conference on Business and  Manag ement , 6-7. 
Rabbani, M .R., Qadri, F.A., Ishfaq, M. 2016. Service Quality, Customer Satisfaction and  
Customer Loyalty: An Empirical Study on Banks in India. VFAST Transactions on 
Education and Social Sciences, 11(2), 1 -9. 
Rabbani, M. R. 2020d. Multidi mensio nal Scaling as a Tool of Positioning: Similarity based  
Perceptual Mapping of Banks in Saudi Arabia . Internati onal Journal on Emerging 
Technologies , 11(3) . 
Rabbani, M .R., Khan , S. 2020a. Agility and Fintech is the Future of Islamic Finance: A  
Study From I slamic Banks in Bahrain.  International Journal of Scientific and 
technology Research , Vo. 9, Issue 3.  
Rabbani, M.R., Shahnawaz, Abey. J ., Rahiman , H. 2020b. Analysis of Critical Barriers to  
Women Entrepreneurship in Bahrain: An Exploratory study.  Internat ional Journal of 
Scientific and Technology Research 9, 3.  
Rabbani, M .R., Khan, S., Thalassinos , I.E. 2020c.  FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance:  
An Extensive Literature Review. International Journal of Economics and Business 
Administration , 8(2), 65-86.  
Robu, M. 2013. The dynamic and importance of SMEs in economy.  The USV annals of  
economics and public admin istration,  13(17), 84 -89. 
Romer, C.D. 1990. The great crash and the onset of the great depression.  The Quarterly  
Journal of Economics,  105(3), 5 97-624. 
Saqib, L.  2011 . Financing Agriculture Through Islamic Commercial Transaction  , 1st  
ed. Lambert Academi c Publishing . 
Shahnawaz . 2015. Conversion between Hindi and Urdu . International Conference on  
Computing, Communication & Automation, Noida , 309 -313. 
Shahnawaz, Mishra , B.R . 2015. An English to Urdu translation model based on CBR, ANN  
and translation rule s. International Journal of Advanced Intelligence Paradigms 7 (1), 
1-23. 
Shahnawaz, Mishra , B.R . 2013 a. Rule -based approach for handling of case m arkers in  
English to Urdu/Hindi translation. International Journal of Knowledge Engineering 
and Soft Data Para digms , 4(2), 138-165. 
Shahnawaz, Mishra , B.R . 2013b. Statistical machine translation system for English to Urdu.  
International Journal of Advanc ed Intelligence Paradigms , 5(3), 182-203. 
Shahnawaz, Mishra , B.R. 2011. ANN and rule based model for English to  Urdu -Hindi  An Artificial Intelligence and N LP based Islamic FinTech Model Combining  Zakat and 
Qardh -Al-Hasan for Countering the Adverse Impact of COVID 19 on SMEs and Individual s       
 364 
 
 machine translation system. In Proceedings of National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence and agents: Theory  & Application (AIAIA TA), 115 -121. 
Sukesti, F., Budiman, M. 2018. The Role of Zakat in Business Development of SMEs (Study  
on Bazna s Semarang, Central Java, Indonesia).  International Journal of Islamic 
Business Ethics,  3(1), 401 -409.  
Sumner, A., Hoy, C. , Juarez, E.O. 2020. E stimates of impact of COVID 19 on global  
poverty. Wider working paper 2020/43: Available at : 
https://www.wider.unu.edu/sites/default/files/Publ icatio ns/Working -
paper/PDF/wp2020 -43.pdf . Accessed on 14 April, 2020.  
Taha, R., Nor, M.N.M. 2013. Role of zakat to eradicate poverty in Malaysia.  Jurnal  
Pengurusan (UKM Journal of Management),  39.  
Usmani, M.T.  2008 . An Introduction to Islamic  Financial System . Maktaba Maariful  
Qurān , Karachi , 10-221. 
Widiyanto, W., Mutamimah, S., Hendar, H. 2011. Effectiveness of Qard al -hasan financing  
as a poverty alleviation model.  Economic Journal of Emerging Markets,  3(1), 27 -42. 
World Bank. 2020. Small and Medium Enterprises Finance. Avai lable at :  
https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/smefinance . Accessed on 14 April, 2020.  