CompLex: A New Corpus for Lexical Complexity Prediction from Likert Scale
Data
Matthew Shardlow1, Michael Cooper1, Marcos Zampieri2
1Manchester Metropolitan University, UK
2Rochester Institute of Technology, USA
M.Shardlow@mmu.ac.uk, mikejcooper90@gmail.com, Marcos.Zampieri@rit.edu
Abstract
Predicting which words are considered hard to understand for a given target population is a vital step in many NLP applications such as
text simpliﬁcation. This task is commonly referred to as Complex Word Identiﬁcation (CWI). With a few exceptions, previous studies
have approached the task as a binary classiﬁcation task in which systems predict a complexity value (complex vs. non-complex) for
a set of target words in a text. This choice is motivated by the fact that all CWI datasets compiled so far have been annotated using a
binary annotation scheme. Our paper addresses this limitation by presenting the ﬁrst English dataset for continuous lexical complexity
prediction. We use a 5-point Likert scale scheme to annotate complex words in texts from three sources/domains: the Bible, Europarl,
and biomedical texts. This resulted in a corpus of 9,476 sentences each annotated by around 7 annotators.
Keywords: Complex Word Identiﬁcation, Text Simpliﬁcation, Lexical Complexity Prediction
1. Introduction
In many readability applications, it is useful to know the
complexity of a given word. In early approaches to the
readability task, simple metrics such as whether a word
had more than 3 syllables (Mc Laughlin, 1969) or was on a
given list or not (Dale and Chall, 1948) were used to iden-
tify complex words. More recently, automated methods for
detecting complex words have also been used such as us-
ing a threshold on the word’s frequency (Shardlow, 2013),
or attempting to use a machine learning classiﬁer to deter-
mine whether a word is complex or not (Paetzold and Spe-
cia, 2016; Yimam et al., 2018).
These approaches make the fundamental assumption that
lexical complexity is binary. That words fall into one of
two categories: difﬁcult, or not. Previous approaches to
Complex Word Identiﬁcation (CWI), such as the one used
in the CWI shared task (SemEval-2016 Task 11) (Paetzold
and Specia, 2016), therefore typically refer to binary iden-
tiﬁcation of complex words. A word close to the decision
boundary is assumed to be just as complex as one further
away. In our work, we move away from this assumption.
We theorise that all words are in fact on a continuous scale
of complexity and that lexical complexity should be iden-
tiﬁed accordingly. Binary Complex Word Identiﬁcation ef-
fectively puts an arbitrary threshold on this scale, desig-
nating words above or below as complex or simple respec-
tively. In this work, we have foregone the old acronym of
CWI, in favour of a new acronym LCP (Lexical Complex-
ity Prediction) which better suits our task of predicting how
complex a given word may be.
Many factors can be considered to affect lexical complex-
ity prediction. We may consider that the context in which a
word is found will affect its understandability. If a word is
found in the context of known words, then it may be pos-
sible to intuit the meaning from the context. Conversely,
a word found in the context of other unknown words may
be more difﬁcult to comprehend. Similarly, a reader’s fa-
miliarity with the genre of the text may affect the per-
ceived complexity of a word. A Biologist reading a Physicsjournal may struggle with the specialist terms, as would a
Physicist reading a Biology journal, but they would each be
comfortable with reading material from their own ﬁeld.
The role of the individual user cannot be overlooked when
considering LCP and it is important to consider that al-
though we aim to identify a complexity value for each
word, this may need to be adapted for each reader, or group.
It may be the case that some words have a high variability
(i.e., some readers ﬁnd them easy and some ﬁnd them hard),
whereas the complexity value of other words is more stable
(i.e., all users give the word the same score).
Finally, we may wish to consider the effect of multi word
expressions on lexical complexity. For example, if I know
the complexity value of the constituent words in a multi
word expression, can I combine these to give the com-
plexity value of the MWE itself? In some cases, this
may be possible (red car is a composition of ‘red’ and
‘car’), whereas in others it may be more difﬁcult (‘Euro-
pean Union’ has a deeper meaning than ‘European’ and
‘Union’ combined).
In our present work, we introduce CompLex1, a new cor-
pus for lexical complexity prediction. we have used crowd
sourcing to annotate a new corpus of 8,979 instances cover-
ing 3 genres with lexical complexity scores using a 5-point
Likert scale (Section 3.) We have performed baseline ex-
periments to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of a classiﬁer in pre-
dicting lexical complexity, as well as further experiments
to address some of the open questions as described above
(Section 4.) We report our results and discuss our ﬁndings
throughout (Section 5.)
2. Related Work
2.1. Lexical Complexity
Given the interest of the community in CWI, two shared
tasks on this topic have been organized so far. The ﬁrst
edition of the CWI shared task was the aforementioned
SemEval-2016 Task 11 (Paetzold and Specia, 2016). In
CWI 2016, complexity was deﬁned as whether or not
1https://github.com/MMU-TDMLab/CompLexarXiv:2003.07008v3  [cs.CL]  11 Jun 2020a word is difﬁcult to understand for non-native English
speakers. In the CWI 2016 dataset, the annotation followed
the binary approach described in the Introduction, where
English words in context were tagged as complex or non-
complex. The organizers labeled a word as complex in the
dataset if the word has been assigned by at least one of the
annotators as complex. All words that have not been as-
signed by at least one annotator as complex have been la-
beled as non-complex. The task was to use this dataset to
train classiﬁers to predict lexical complexity assigning a la-
bel 0 to non-complex words and 1 to complex ones. The
dataset made available by the CWI 2016 organizers com-
prised a training set of 2,237 instances and a much larger
test set of 88,221 instances, an unusual setting in most
NLP shared tasks where most often the training set is much
larger than the test set.
In Zampieri et al. (2017) oracle and ensemble methods
have been used to investigate the performance of the partic-
ipating systems. The study showed that most systems per-
formed poorly due to the way the data was annotated and
also due to the fact that lexical complexity was modelled as
a binary task, a shortcoming addressed by CompLex.
Finally, a second iteration of the CWI shared task was orga-
nized at the BEA workshop 2018 (Yimam et al., 2018). In
CWI 2018, a multilingual dataset was made available con-
taining English, German, and Spanish training and testing
data for monolingual tracks, and a French test set for mul-
tilingual predictions. It featured two sub-tasks: a binary
classiﬁcation task, similar to the CWI 2016 setup, where
participants were asked to label the target words in con-
text as complex (1) or simple (0); and a probabilistic clas-
siﬁcation task where participants were asked to assign the
probability that an annotator would ﬁnd a word complex.
The element of regression in the probabilistic classiﬁcation
task was an interesting addition to CWI 2018. However, the
continuous complexity value for each word was calculated
as the proportion of annotators that found a word complex
(i.e., if 5 out of 10 annotators marked a word as complex
then the word was given a score of 0.5), a measure which is
difﬁcult to interpret as it relies on an aggregation of an arbi-
trary number of absolute binary judgements of complexity
to give a continuous value.
2.2. Text Simpliﬁcation
Text simpliﬁcation evaluation is an active area of research,
with recent efforts focussing on evaluating the whole pro-
cess of text simpliﬁcation in the style of machine translation
evaluation. Whilst BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002) has
been used for text simpliﬁcation evaluation, this is not nec-
essarily an informative measure, as it inly measures similar-
ity to the target. It does not help a researcher to understand
whether the resultant text preserves meaning, or is gram-
matical.
To overcome some of these shortcomings, Xu et al. (2016)
introduced the SARI method of evaluating text simpli-
ﬁcation systems. SARI comprises parallel simpliﬁed-
unsimpliﬁed sentences and measures additions, deletions
and those words that are kept by a system. IT does this
by comparing input sentences to reference sentences to de-
termine the appropriateness of a simpliﬁcation. However,SARI is still an automated measure and optimising sys-
tems to get a good SARI score may lead to systems that
do well on the metric, but not in human evaluations. Re-
cently, EASSE (Alva-Manchego et al., 2019) has been re-
leased to attempt to standardise simpliﬁcation evaluation by
providing a common reference implementation of several
text simpliﬁcation benchmarks.
Our work does not attempt to simplify a whole sentence
through paraphrasing or machine translation, but instead
looks at the possibility of identifying which words in a
sentence are complex and speciﬁcally, how complex those
words are. This is a task intrinsically linked to the evalu-
ation of text simpliﬁcation as the ultimate goal of the task
is to reduce the overall complexity of a text. Therefore,
by properly understanding and predicting the complexity
of words and phrases in a text, we can measure whether it
has reduced in complexity after simpliﬁcation.
3. Dataset
3.1. Data Collection
In the ﬁrst instance, we set about gathering data which we
would later annotate with lexical complexity values. We
felt it was important to preserve the context in which a word
appeared to allow us to understand how the usage of the
word affected its complexity. We also allowed multiple in-
stances of each word (up to 5) to allow for cases in our cor-
pus where one word is annotated with different complexity
values given different contexts.
To add further variation to our data, three corpora were se-
lected as follows:
Bible: We selected the World English Bible translation
from Christodouloupoulos and Steedman (2015). This
is a modern translation, so does not contain archaic
words (thee, thou, etc.), but still contains religious lan-
guage that may be complex.
Europarl: We used the English portion of the Euro-
pean Pariliament proceedings selected from europarl
(Koehn, 2005). This is a very varied corpus talking
about all manner of matters related to european policy.
As this is speech transcription, it is often dialogical in
nature.
Biomedical: We also selected articles from the CRAFT
corpus (Bada et al., 2012), which are all in the biomed-
ical domain. These present a very specialised type
of language that will be unfamiliar to non-domain ex-
perts.
Each corpus has its own unique language features and
styles. Predicting the lexical complexity of diverse sources
further distinguishes our work from previous attempts,
which have traditionally focused on Wikipedia and News
texts.
In addition to single words, we also selected targets con-
taining two tokens (henceforth referred to as multi word ex-
pressions). We used syntactic patterns to identify the multi
word expressions, selecting for adjective-noun or noun-
noun patterns. We discounted any syntactic pattern that was
followed by a further noun to avoid splitting complex nounContexts Unique Words Median Annotators Mean Complexity STD Complexity
All 9476 / 7974 / 1500 5166 / 3903 / 1263 7 / 7 / 7 0.394 / 0.385 / 0.442 0.110 / 0.108 / 0.105
Europarl 3496 / 2896 / 600 2194 / 1693 / 501 7 / 7 / 7.5 0.390 / 0.381 / 0.433 0.101 / 0.100 / 0.091
Biomed 2960 / 2480 / 480 1670 / 1250 / 420 7 / 7 / 7 0.407 / 0.395 / 0.470 0.115 / 0.112 / 0.109
Bible 3020 / 2600 / 420 1705 / 1362 / 343 7 / 7 / 8 0.385 / 0.379 / 0.422 0.112 / 0.111 / 0.112
Table 1: The statistics for CompLex. Each cell shows three values, which are split according to the statistics for ‘All’ /
‘Single Words’ / ‘Multi Words’
phrases (e.g., noun-noun-noun, or adjective-noun-noun).
Clearly this approach does not capture the full variation of
multi word expressions. It limits the length of each expres-
sion to 2 tokens and only identiﬁes compound or described
nouns. We consider this a positive point as it allows us
to make a focused investigation on these common types of
MWEs, whilst discounting other less frequent types. The
investigation of other types of MWEs may be addressed in
a wider study.
We have not analysed the distribution of compositional vs.
non-compositional constructions in our dataset, however
we expect both to be present. It would be interesting to
further analyse these to distinguish whether the complex-
ity of an MWE can be inferred from tokens in the com-
positional case, and to what degree this holds for the non-
compositional case.
For each corpus we selected words using predetermined
frequency bands, ensuring that words in our corpus were
distributed across the range of low to high frequency. As
frequency is correlated to complexity, this allows us to be
certain that our ﬁnal corpus will have a range of high and
low complexity targets. We chose to select 3000 single
words and 600 MWEs from each corpus to give a total of
10,800 instances in our pre-annotated corpus. We automat-
ically annotated each sentence with POS tags and only se-
lected nouns as our targets. Again, this limits the ﬁeld of
study, but allows us to make a more focused contribution on
the nature of lexical complexity. We have included exam-
ples of the contexts, target words and average complexity
values in Table 2.
3.2. Data Labelling
As has been previously mentioned, prior datasets have fo-
cused on either (a) binary complexity or (b) probabilistic
complexity. Neither of which give a true representation of
the complexity of a word. In our annotation we chose to
annotate each word on a 5-point Likert scale, where each
point was given the following descriptor:
1. Very Easy: Words which were very familiar to an anno-
tator.
2. Easy: Words with which an annotator was aware of the
meaning.
3. Neutral: A word which was neither difﬁcult nor easy.
4. Difﬁcult: Words which an annotator was unclear of the
meaning, but may have been able to infer the meaning
from the sentence.
5. Very Difﬁcult: Words that an annotator had never seen
before, or were very unclear.We used the following key to transform the numerical la-
bels to a 0-1 range when aggregating the annotations: 1!
0,2!0:25,3!0:5,4!0:75,5!1. This allowed us
to ensure that our complexity labels were normalised in the
range 0—1.
We employed crowd workers through the ﬁgure eight plat-
form, requesting 20 annotations per data instance, paying
around 3 cents per annotation. We selected for annotators
from English speaking countries (UK, USA and Australia)
and selected to disable the use of the Google Translate
browser plug-in to ensure that annotators were reading the
original source texts and not translated versions of them. In
addition, we used the annotation platform’s in-built qual-
ity control metrics to ﬁlter out annotators who failed pre-
set test questions, or who answered a set of questions too
quickly.
Our job completed within 3 hours, with over 1500 annota-
tors. The annotators were able to ﬁll in a post-hoc annota-
tion survey, with average satisfaction being around 3 out of
5, the scores typically lower on the ‘ease of job’ metric.
After we had collected our results, we further analysed the
data to detect instances where annotators had not fully par-
ticipated in the task. We speciﬁcally analysed instances
where an annotator had given the exact same annotation
for all instances (usually these were all ’Neutral’) and dis-
carded these from our data. We retained any data instance
that had at least 4 valid annotations in our ﬁnal dataset.
3.3. Statistics
We have provided comprehensive statistics on our corpus in
Table 1. These show that the average complexity for words
in our corpus is 0.395, with a standard deviation of 0.115.
A complexity score of 0.5 would be neutral and 0.25 would
be easy, so this indicates that on average the words in our
corpus fell towards the easier end of the scale. There are
however words distributed across the full range of possible
complexity annotations as shown by the ridgeline plot in
Figure 1. This plot shows the density of complexity anno-
tations in our corpus. It indicates that, whilst the majority
of the probability mass is found to the left of the mid-point,
there are still many annotations either side of the mid-point
for each sub-corpus and for the corpus as a whole.
Table 1 shows that there was a median of 7 annotators per
instance. We requested a total of 20 annotations per in-
stance, but discarded individual annotations that did not
meet our inclusion criteria. We discarded any data instances
with fewer than 4 annotations. Accordingly, the lowest
number of annotations was 4, and the highest was 20.
Analysing the sub-genres in our corpus shows some subtle,
but meaningful differences between the genres. We used
the same inclusion criteria to select words across genres,Corpus Context Complexity
Bible This was the length of Sarah’s life. 0.125
Biomed [...] cell growth rates were reported to be 50% lower [...] 0.125
EuroparlCould you tell me under which rule they were enabled to
extend this item to have four rather than three debates ?0.208
EuroparlThese agencies have gradually become very important in
theﬁnancial world , for a variety of reasons.0.438
Biomed [...] leads to the hallmark loss of striatal neurons [...] 0.531
Bible Theidols of Egypt will tremble at his presence [...] 0.575
Bible This is the law of the trespass offering . 0.639
EuroparlThey do hold elections, but candidates have to be en-
dorsed by the conservative clergy, so dissenters are by
deﬁnition excluded.0.688
Biomed [..] due to a reduction in adipose tissue. 0.813
Table 2: Examples from out corpus, the target word is highlighted in bold text.
Figure 1: A ridge line plot showing the probability density function of the full dataset (all) as well as each of the genres
contained within the full dataset. The vertical dashed line indicates the median in each case.
so as not to bias our results. Bible text and Europarl have
very similar average complexity values (0.387 and 0.390),
whereas Biomed is higher at 0.407. The biomedical texts
are written for a technical audience and can be expected to
contain more technical terminology. The bible and europarl
may contain genre speciﬁc terminology, but will in general
reference topics of common knowledge, which will result
in higher familiarity and lower complexity.
We can also see that there is a difference in the complex-
ity level of the annotations between multi word expressions
and single words. In the aggregated corpus, single words
have an average complexity score of 0.385, whereas multi-
words have a higher score of 0.444. This is reﬂected across
each genre, with the largest difference being in biomedical
(0.395 / 0.470) and the smallest change being in the Bible
(0.380 / 0.428).4. Baseline System
We developed a baseline for predicting the complexity of a
word using our data. We used a linear regression with em-
bedding features for the word and context as well as three
hand crafted features, which are known to be strong predic-
tors of lexical complexity. Speciﬁcally, the feature sets we
used are as follows:
Glove Embeddings: We captured the 300-dimensional
Glove embedding (Pennington et al., 2014) for each
token in our corpus. This was encoded as 300 separate
features (one for each dimension of the embedding).
InferSent Embeddings: We captured the 4,096-
dimensional embeddings produced by the InferSent
library (Conneau et al., 2017) for each context. Thesewere encoded as 4,096 separate features, one for each
dimension of the embedding.
Hand Crafted Features: We recorded features which are
typically known to be strong predictors of lexical com-
plexity. Speciﬁcally, we looked at (1) word frequency
according to the GoogleWeb1T resource (Brants and
Franz, 2006), (2) Word length (as number of charac-
ters) and (3) syllable count2.
We trained a linear regression using all of these features.
We used a held-out test set of 10% of the data, stratiﬁed
across corpus type and complexity labels. In addition to
this, we also examined the effect of each feature subset.
We examined this for the corpus as a whole, as well as for
each sub-corpus. These results are presented in Table 3.
All HC Glove Sent
All 0.1238 0.0853 0.0875 0.1207
Bible 0.6648 0.0888 0.0911 —
Biomed 0.2954 0.0908 0.0939 —
Europarl 0.1982 0.0801 0.0879 —
Table 3: The results of our linear regression with different
feature subsets. We have only reported the sentence em-
beddings for the whole corpus as the linear regression for
the sub-corpora failed to provide a reliable model. All re-
sults are reported as mean absolute error. The column head-
ers are as follows: ‘All’ refers to all features concatenated.
‘HC’ refers to hand crafted features, ‘Glove’ refers to the
Glove Embeddings (at the target word level) and ‘Sent’
refers to the InferSent embeddings of the contexts.
5. Discussion
Our results show promise for future systems trying to pre-
dict lexical complexity by training on continuous data. In
the best case, using hand crafted word features such as
length, frequency and syllable count, we are able to pre-
dict complexity with a mean absolute error of 0.0853. Our
values range from 0 (very easy) to 1 (very difﬁcult), so this
implies that we would be able to predict complexity with a
good degree of accuracy. Features such as length and fre-
quency have long been known to be good predictors of lex-
ical complexity and so it is unsurprising that these ranked
highly.
It is interesting to note that the word embeddings performed
at a similar level of accuracy (0.0875) to the hand crafted
word features. Word embeddings model the context of a
word. It may have been the case that certain dimensions
of the (300 dimensional) embeddings were more useful for
predicting the complexity of a word than others. It would be
interesting to further analyse this and to see what contextual
information is encoded in the dimensions of these embed-
dings. It may be that some dimensions encode contexts that
rely solely on less frequent, or more frequent words and are
therefore better indicators of complexity than others.
Conversely however, the sentence embeddings did not turn
out to be good predictors of lexical complexity. These em-
beddings (4,096 dimensions) were much larger than the
2https://pypi.org/project/syllables/word embeddings, which may have made them less suit-
able for the linear regression. It may be the case that lower
dimensional representations of the context would be have
more predictive power in our corpus. Although this result
implies that context is not important for lexical complexity,
we may yet see that future experiments ﬁnd new ways of
integrating the context of the word to better understand it’s
complexity.
As a classiﬁer, we chose a linear regression. We also used
Glove embeddings and infersent. We may ﬁnd that using
embeddings which adapt to the context, such as in BERT
and a neural network for prediction would yield stronger
results. However, in this work we have only aimed to give
an understanding of what types of features can be useful for
predicting the values in our corpus, not to produce a state
of the art system for the prediction of lexical complexity.
We can see that there are signiﬁcant differences in the mean
absolute error for each sub-corpus. Whereas the mean ab-
solute error was lower for Europarl (0.0801), it was higher
for the Bible and Biomed, indicating that the type of lan-
guage in these two corpora was more difﬁcult to model.
This is reﬂected across different feature subsets, indicating
it is a feature of the dataset and not a random ﬂuctuation of
our model.
We did not calculate an inter-annotator agreement as part
of this work. This is difﬁcult to do in a crowd sourcing set-
ting as we have many annotators and there is no guarantee
(or indeed a method to control) whether the same annota-
tors see a common subset of the annotation data. Instead
we used the following principles: (1) We selected for an-
notators who were known to the platform to provide high
quality work. (2) We paid annotators well, encouraging
them to take more time over the annotations. (3) We ﬁl-
tered out annotators who had not participated in the task
properly. We do not necessarily expect annotators to com-
pletely agree on the complexity of a word as one annotator
may be more familiar with a word than another and hence
ﬁnd it easier. We have taken the average values of all anno-
tations for each instance in our corpus, with the hope that
this will further smooth out any outliers. In Figure 2, we
have shown a few words and their individual distributions.
It is clear that whilst annotators generally agreed on some
words, they differed greatly on others. This is reﬂective
of the subjectivity that is present in complexity annotations
and warrants further investigation.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we presented CompLex, a new dataset for lex-
ical complexity prediction. We propose a new 5-point Lik-
ert scale annotation scheme to annotate complex words in
texts from three sources: the Bible, Europarl, and biomedi-
cal texts. The result is a dataset of 9,476 which opens new
perspectives in lexical complexity research. We presented
multiple baseline experiments using this data and report the
best result of 0.0853 mean absolute error.
Our work leaves many open questions to be answered, and
we intend to continue our research to further explore the
remaining challenges facing the ﬁeld of lexical complexity
prediction. We have not explored the relationship between
the multi-word expressions and single words in our corpus,Figure 2: Box plot showing the distribution of annotation scores for different words in CompLex.
nor have we explored the transferability of complexity val-
ues between corpora. We have also not fully explored the
range of classiﬁers and deep learning architectures that are
available from the machine learning community. Again, we
expect to cover these in future work.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
valuable feedback. We would also like to thank Richard
Evans for insightful discussions on lexical complexity and
data annotation.
Bibliographical References
Alva-Manchego, F., Martin, L., Scarton, C., and Specia, L.
(2019). EASSE: Easier automatic sentence simpliﬁca-
tion evaluation. In Proceedings of EMNLP-IJCNLP .
Bada, M., Eckert, M., Evans, D., Garcia, K., Shipley, K.,
Sitnikov, D., Baumgartner, W. A., Cohen, K. B., Ver-
spoor, K., Blake, J. A., et al. (2012). Concept annotation
in the craft corpus. BMC bioinformatics , 13(1):161.
Brants, T. and Franz, A. (2006). The google web 1t 5-gram
corpus version 1.1. LDC2006T13 .
Christodouloupoulos, C. and Steedman, M. (2015). A
massively parallel corpus: the bible in 100 languages.
Language Resources and Evaluation , 49(2):375–395,
Jun.
Conneau, A., Kiela, D., Schwenk, H., Barrault, L., and
Bordes, A. (2017). Supervised learning of universal
sentence representations from natural language inference
data. In Proceedings of EMNLP .
Dale, E. and Chall, J. S. (1948). A formula for predicting
readability: Instructions. Educational research bulletin ,
pages 37–54.Koehn, P. (2005). Europarl: A parallel corpus for statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of MT Summit .
Mc Laughlin, G. H. (1969). Smog grading-a new readabil-
ity formula. Journal of reading , 12(8):639–646.
Paetzold, G. H. and Specia, L. (2016). SemEval 2016 Task
11: Complex Word Identiﬁcation. In Proceedings of Se-
mEval .
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. (2002).
Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Proceedings of ACL .
Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. D. (2014).
Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP .
Shardlow, M. (2013). A Comparison of Techniques to Au-
tomatically Identify Complex Words. In Proceedings of
the ACL Student Research Workshop .
Xu, W., Napoles, C., Pavlick, E., Chen, Q., and Callison-
Burch, C. (2016). Optimizing statistical machine trans-
lation for text simpliﬁcation. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics , 4:401–415.
Yimam, S. M., Biemann, C., Malmasi, S., Paetzold, G.,
Specia, L., ˇStajner, S., Tack, A., and Zampieri, M.
(2018). A report on the complex word identiﬁcation
shared task 2018. In Proceedings of BEA .
Zampieri, M., Malmasi, S., Paetzold, G., and Specia, L.
(2017). Complex word identiﬁcation: Challenges in data
annotation and system performance. In Proceedings of
NLP-TEA .