Customer sentiment toward the use of cameras at 
Dutch supermarket self -scan checkouts  
Dennis S. Vlaar  
Master Applied AI  
University of Applied Sciences  
Amsterdam, Netherlands  
dennisvlaar@gmail.com  
Abstract—Self-scan checkouts have increased the speed of 
the payment process in supermarkets tremendously. The use of 
cameras and facial recognition could p otentially speed up this 
process more by facilitating as an age checker for alcohol 
control. The use of facial recognition in public spaces is a 
privacy sensitive subject, and the question is if customers are 
comfortable with the presence of these technolo gies in the 
supermarket. A survey has been conducted and the results show 
that a majority of Dutch supermarket customers is not 
comfortable with these technologies. There is no correlation 
found between age and sentiment toward these technologies.  
Keywords —Machine vision, Face -recognition, Customer 
sentiment  
I. INTRODUCTION  
 According to Liftin and Wolfram s elf-scan checkouts have 
increased the speed of the payment process for supermarket 
customers tremendously  (Liftin & Wolfram, 2009) . Customer 
can now scan products with a portable hand -scanner while 
shopping. The use of facial recognition can speed up this 
process even more by  facilitating age -verification for when 
customers buy alcohol. This technology also has the potential 
of impr oving the quality of age -verification and mitigate false -
positives. The use of cameras in public spaces, and the use of 
facial recognition software is a loaded topic and raises 
concerns regarding privacy.  This research is focused on 
customer sentiment towa rds the use of cameras at self -scan 
checkouts in supermarkets.  
This paper stems from a machine vision project at the 
University of Applied Sciences.   During this project two ideas 
where proposed which use facial recognition software at the 
self-scan checkouts in supermarkets. The first idea consists of 
using facial recognition software to estimate a customer’s age. 
Using this technology no image data needs to be saved, the 
age-estimation will be done real time using a video feed. This 
first idea raises the first research question:  
Research question 1:  
“What is the sentiment of  Dutch supermarket customers 
toward supermarkets using face recognition for age 
estimation?”  
The second idea consists of using facial recognition software 
to identify a person. This technology requires image data of a 
person. A person will put his face in a database once, then the 
age of the customer will be verified manually and will be 
linked to his biometric face. This second idea raises the second 
research question:  
Research question 2:  
“What is the sentiment of Dutch supermarket customers 
toward supermarkets saving faces for age verification?”  
The goal of this research is to get insights in the opinion of the 
Dutch public toward the use of above mentioned technologies. This will help Dutch supermarkets/retailers to make an 
informed decision to either implement or not implement th ese 
technologies . 
II. RELATED WORK  
A. Beyond face value: public attitudes to facial 
recognition technology. (Ada Lovelace institute)  
Facial recognition technology is now widely employed in 
several industries in the UK. It has been used at airports since 
2008 at ePassport border security gates, and Heathrow Airport 
has ambitions to replace check -in and passport checks with it. 
The financial services hub Canary Wharf is exploring 
implementing facial recognition technology throughout its 97 -
acre property, and central London's Kings Cross shopping and 
commercial sector has been monitored using CCTV cameras 
with facial recognition capabilities.  
The morality of facial recognition technology is a hot topic in 
British society right now. While reports concerning the use of 
face recognition  in key London neighborhoods and shopping 
centers drew regulatory investigation and political censure, 
police trials of the technology in public locations in London 
and Wales were met with outcry and legal challenge.  
In light of this, the Ada Lovelace Inst itute engaged YouGov 
to conduct the first survey of its kind to ascertain public 
opinion in the UK about the burgeoning use of face 
recognition technology in both the public and private sectors. 
A nationwide representative sample of 4109 persons from the 
UK are included in the poll. It records the initial reactions of 
the UK public to a variety of scenarios explaining particular 
uses of face recognition technology in various fields and for a 
range of objectives.  
The report summarizes six key findings from t he survey, the 
top four findings that are related to the research questions of 
this paper the most are:  
1. Although there is a high level of awareness about 
facial recognition technology, little is actually known 
about it, especially in terms of the technolog y's 
limits.  
2. Nearly half of the population expresses the opinion 
that individuals should be able to refuse to use or 
consent to facial recognition technology, indicating 
that consent is a crucial safety measure for many 
people.  
3. The majority of people suppor t facial recognition 
technology when there is a demonstrable public 
benefit and appropriate safeguards in place, which 
justifies greater investment in testing and articulating 
the potential public benefits of such technologies.  
4. Further discussion between t he public, business 
sector, and policymakers is required in order to 
comprehend and address the public's lack of faith in the private sector's ethical use of face recognition 
technology.  
B. Has facial recognition technology been misused? 
A public perception m odel of facial recognition 
scenarios.  (Lai, X. & Patrick Rau, P. L. ) 
In this study, a model of the public's perception of facial 
recognition technology (FRT) is constructed. This study used 
a questionnaire with 704 participants to examine people's 
familiarity with, trust in, and attitudes concerning FRT 
scenarios. The research then used hierarchical cluster analysis 
to segment public opinions of several FRT scenarios and 
looked at how familiarity, trust, and attitude related to each 
FRT scenario. Fo ur major conclusions were found, the two 
conclusions that are related to  the research questions of this 
paper the most are:  
1. Different FRT scenarios generated different public 
views, which could be categorized into four groups 
based on a shared level of fam iliarity, trust, and 
attitude.  
2. In each FRT scenario, attitude was primarily 
influenced by trust, not familiarity, while 
demographic factors and trust propensity had no 
discernible influence on public perception.  
C. Resistance to facial recognition payment in 
China: The influence of privacy -related factors. ( 
Liu et al.)   
China is regarded as a pioneer in cashless payment 
transactions as a result of the worldwide digital payment trend. 
Because mobile payment options are so common, 40% of 
Chinese citiz ens believe they do not need to carry cash when 
they are on the go. However, since 2019, facial data leaks in 
China have resulted in an increase in financial market disputes 
and civil lawsuits, which may cause consumers to delay or 
even refuse to adopt FRP . 
This study investigated users' reluctance to accept facial 
recognition payments within the context of China's innovation 
resistance and privacy calculus. This research  uses three key 
components of the users' own privacy perception (privacy 
concerns, perc eived privacy risk, and privacy control) as well 
as two essential components of the characteristics and factors 
related to FRP (perceived benefits and the perceived 
effectiveness of privacy policy) in order to look into potential 
relationships between the antecedents and the outcome 
variable of resistance.  
A total of 1200 valid observations were gathered, including 
both individuals who had used face recognition payment 
systems previously and those who had not.  
The findings demonstrate that privacy control, privacy risk, 
and perceived advantages are just a few of the factors in the 
privacy calculus model that are significantly impacted by how 
effective a privacy policy is regarded. In that the perceived 
effectiveness of privacy policies has a positive effect on 
privacy control while having a negative effect on privacy risk, 
they agree with a prior study.  
This study also reveals evidence that the perceived 
effectiveness of privacy policies has a negative influence on 
users' resistance to facial recognition tech nology. It is 
important to note that the perceived effectiveness of privacy 
policies has a significant impact on all path coefficients of 
resistance. It suggests that users' reluctance to choose FRP has lessened when the platform's bioinformation privacy p olicy 
was made public.  
D. A Study on the influence of customer 
characteristics on innovation resistance and 
intention to use in face recognition payment 
system.  (Zhang  et al.) 
The findings of this study indicate that consumers' 
perceptions of risks and their views toward prior goods have 
a favorable influence on innovation resistance, whereas 
customers' motivation and self -efficacy have a negative 
influence. Additionally, research demonstrates that customer 
resistance to innovation will negatively affect usage  
intentions.  
 
On the basis of the findings of this study, the following 
conclusions can be made :  
First, the study discovered that customer innovation had no 
discernible influence on innovation resistance during the 
innovation and diffusion of the face recognition payment 
system. This is due to the fact that using facial recognition to 
confirm identity is not a novel use of biometrics. Customers 
are used to using some physical features for identity 
verification.  
Secondly, according to the findings, customers' capacity for 
risk perception has the biggest influence on innovation 
resistance. Biometrics is specifically tied to the customer 
themselves. Customers are concerned about how successfully 
privacy and personal information can be maintained in the  age 
of big data because to the vast gathering and utilization of 
biological data. The ability to employ facial recognition and 
simple payment for a long time will therefore depend on the 
formulation of authoritative large data collecting rights, usage 
rights, and forgetting rights.  
III. METHODS  
A. Survey  
To answer the two research questions, a survey was 
conducted. The survey consisted of three parts and is shown 
in Appendix A. The first part contain s demographic  questions 
and general question on the use of self -checkouts at the 
supermarket . The second part focused on outlining a scenario 
related to the first research question, and the third part focused 
on outlining a scenario related to the second research question. 
First the scenarios where introduce d, then the participants had 
to indicate how comfortable they would be in these scenarios. 
Lastly the participants had to substantiate their answer.   
B. Reliabilit y 
The survey was distributed in two ways. An anonymous link 
was distributed to friends and family of me and a classmate. 
Also a QR -code was distributed through campus. This has led 
to more response from people aged under 25. The distribution 
in age can be seen in figure 1 below.  The distribution of gender 
can be  seen in figure 2.    
Figure 1.  Age distribution of survey participants.   
 
Figure 2. Gender distribution of survey participants.  
C. Validity  
To ensure the survey measures what it is intended to measure 
the survey was made  together with a classmate who had a 
similar research topic. Also, the  survey is peer reviewed by 
four other classmates who provided feedback.  
IV. RESULTS  
This chapter discusses the results of the survey given in 
Appendix A.  
A. Results. Sentiment toward face re cognition for 
age estimation.  
Scenario 1 : “Supermarkets will be using facial recognition 
at self -checkouts to estimate a customer’s age. This will only 
be done when the customer gives consent.”  
Respondents could rate their comfortability with this scenario  
on a scale of zero to ten. The results are shown in table 1.  
 
How comfortable are you  with this scenario ? 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
7 11 4 5 4 7 7 9 5 8 4 
Table 1. Comfortibility of supermarket customers with scenario 1.  
Table 1 shows that the majority of the respondents are not 
comfortable with scenario  2. 63.4% of the respondents scores 
a 6 or lower in comfortability with this scenario. Only 36.6% 
of the respondents are reporting to feel a 7 or higher in 
comfortability w ith this scenario.  
When asked why respondents are not comfortable with this 
scenario, the answers that were chosen the most are: It is an 
invasion of my privacy (18.1%), I do not trust them to use the 
technology ethically (13.7%), it will normalize surveillance 
(12.6%), it w ill be misused or hacked (9.3%).  
When the respondents who are comfortable with this scenario 
were asked why, these were their most answered responses: It 
will reduce delays (18.5%), It’s convenient (16.3%), it will not 
affect me personally (16.3%), I trus t them to use the 
technology ethically (13%).  
When a test for correlation is done between age and 
comfortability of scenario 1 the result is an r value of -0.111 with a p -value of 0.365. This means there is no significant 
correlation between age and comfo rtability of scenario 1.  
B. Results. Sentiment toward saving faces to 
database.  
Scenario 2: “Customers of supermarkets will have the option 
to get age verification one time. A picture of their fa ce will be 
taken and saved to a database. The next time a customer 
doesn’t need manual ID check, but will be verified using face 
recognition technology.”  
Again, respondents could rate their comfortability  with this 
scenario on a scale of zero to ten. The re sults are shown in 
table 2.  
 
 
 
Table 2. Comfortability of supermarket customer with scenario 2.  
Table 2 shows that the majority of the respondents are not 
comfortable with scenario 2. 70.2% of the respondents scores 
a 6 or lower in comfortability with this scenario. Only 29.8% 
of the respondents are reporting to feel a 7 or higher in 
comfortability with this scenario.  
When asked why respondent are not comfor table with this 
scenario, the answers that were given the most are: It is an 
invasion of my privacy (18.1%), I do not trust them to use the 
technology ethically (14.3%), it will be misused or hacked 
(14.3%), it will normalize surveillance (11.2%).  
The resp ondents who are comfortable with this scenario report 
the following reasons: It’s convenient (15.2%), it will reduce 
delays (13.6%), it’s reliable (13.6%), it’s accurate (13.6%), it 
will not affect me personally (12.1%).   
When a test for correlation is do ne between age and 
comfortability of scenario 2 the result is an r value of -0.104 
with a p -value of 0.444. This means there is no significant 
correlation between age and comfortability of scenario 2.  
V. DISCUSSION  
In this paper the following research questions have been 
addressed:   
1. “What is the sentiment of Dutch supermarket 
customers toward supermarkets using face 
recognition for age estimation?”  
2. “What is the sentiment of Dutch supermarket 
customers toward supermarkets saving faces for age 
verification?”  
For the first research question the conclusion can be made that 
a majority of Dutch supermarket customers would not be 
comfortable with supermarkets using facial recognition to 
estimate age. The main reason for people to not feel 
comfortable  toward the use of this technology are privacy 
concerns.  
For the second research question the same conclusion can be 
made, and the results are more clear in this situation. A 
majority of Dutch supermarket customers report to have 
privacy issues with super markets implementing such a 
technology.  
There seems to be no correlation in sentiment toward the use 
of both technologies for age. This means there is no significant 
How comfortable are you with this scenario?  
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
8 11 1 5 3 5 7 8 6 1 2 difference between how comfortable younger people are with 
the use of these technologies versus older people.  
Based on the results of this research, I would advice 
supermarkets to not implement any facial recognition 
technology in their check -out systems. The survey suggests 
that the majority of Dutch supermarket customers are not 
comfortable with the use of facial recognition at self -scan 
checkouts. Implementation of these technologies will most 
likely reduce customer experience.  
SOURCES  
1. Lai, X. & Patrick Rau, P. L. (2021). Has facial 
recognition technology been misused? A public 
perception mo del of facial recognition scenarios. 
Computers in Human Behavior , 124, 106894. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106894  
2. Litfin, T. & Wolfram, G. (2009). New Automated 
Checkout Systems. Retailing in the 21st Century , 
189–203. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-540-
72003 -4_12  
3. Liu, Y. L., Yan, W. & Hu, B. (2021). Resistance to 
facial recognition payment in China: The influence 
of privacy -related factors. Telecommunications 
Policy , 45(5), 102155. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2021.102155  
4. YouGov. (2019). Beyond f ace value: public 
attitudes to facial recognition technology. In 
https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/beyond
-face-value -public -attitudes -to-facial -recognition -
technology/ . Ada Lovelace Institute.  
5. Zhang, L. L., Zhang, Y. B. & Kim, H. K. (2021). A 
Study on the Influence of Customer Characteristics 
on Innovation Resistance and Intention to Use in 
Face Recognition Payment System. Journal of 
Advanced Researches and Reports , 1(3), 47 –54. 
https://doi.org/10.21742/jarr.2021.1.3.07  
 
APPENDIX A 
General Questions:  
Q1. How old are you?  
 
Q2. What gender do you identify as?  
• Male  
• Female  
• Nonbinary  
• Other  
 
Q3. Do you use the self -checkouts at the supermarket?  
• Yes  
• No  
 
Q4. If your answer was yes: how often do you use the self -
checkout?  
• Not very often  
• Often  
• Always  
 
Q5. Do you buy alcohol at the self -checkout in 
supermarkets?  
• Yes • No 
 
Q6. If your answer was yes: Do you feel like the staff checks 
your age often and correctly  
• Both  
• Only often  
• Only correctly  
• Neither  
 
Situation 1:  
Supermarkets will be using facial recognition at self -
checkouts to estimate customers' age. This will only be done 
when the customer gives consent.  
 
Q7. On a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 is not at all comfortable 
and 10 is very comfortable, how comfortable are you with 
supermarkets usi ng facial recognition in this way?  
 
Q8. [Question when Q1 is 6 to 10.] You said that you are 
comfortable with supermarkets using facial recognition 
technology in this way, rating your level of comfort as [insert 
rating from Q1] out of 10. Which of the foll owing are 
reasons why you are comfortable with this? Please select all 
that apply  
• It's convenient  
• It will reduce delays  
• I trust them to use the technology ethically  
• It will encourage good behavior  
• It's reliable  
• It's accurate  
• It's indiscriminate e.g. by rac e and by gender  
• It will not affect me personally  
• It enhances existing security systems (e.g CCTV)  
• I can opt out or consent  
• It will not be misused or hacked  
• Other (specify)  
• Don't know  
Q9. [Question when Q1 is 1 to 5] You said that you are 
uncomfortable with  supermarkets using facial recognition 
technology in this way, rating your level of comfort as [insert 
rating from Q1] out of 10. Which of the following are 
reasons why you are uncomfortable with this? Please select 
all that apply  
• It's inconvenient  
• It will increase delays  
• I do not trust them to use the technology ethically  
• It will reduce freedom of behavior  
• It's unreliable  
• It's inaccurate  
• It can be used to discriminate e.g. by race or gender  
• It will affect me personally  
• It will normalize  surveillance  
• I can't opt out or consent  
• It will be misused or hacked  
• Other (specify)  
• Don't know  
 
Situation 2:  
Customers of supermarkets will have the option to get age 
verification one time. A picture of their face will be taken and saved to a database. T he next time a customer doesn’t 
need manual ID check, but will be verified using face -
recognition technology.  
 
Q10. On a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 is not at all comfortable 
and 10 is very comfortable, how comfortable are you with 
supermarkets using facial recognition in this way?  
 
Q11. [Question when Q4 is 6 to 10.] You said that you are 
comfortable with supermarkets using facial recognition 
technology in this way, rating your level of comfort as [insert 
rating from Q4] out of 10. Which of the following are  
reasons why you are comfortable with this? Please select all 
that apply  
• It's convenient  
• It will reduce delays  
• I trust them to use the technology ethically  
• It will encourage good behavior  
• It's reliable  
• It's accurate  
• It's indiscriminate e.g. by race and by gender  
• It will not affect me personally  
• It enhances existing security systems (e.g CCTV)  
• I can opt out or consent  • It will not be misused or hacked  
• Other (specify)  
• Don't know  
 
Q12. [Question when Q4 is 1 to 5] You said that you are 
uncomfortable with sup ermarkets using facial recognition 
technology in this way, rating your level of comfort as [insert 
rating from Q4] out of 10. Which of the following are 
reasons why you are uncomfortable with this? Please select 
all that apply  
• It's inconvenient  
• It will inc rease delays  
• I do not trust them to use the technology ethically  
• It will reduce freedom of behavior  
• It's unreliable  
• It's inaccurate  
• It can be used to discriminate e.g. by race or gender  
• It will affect me personally  
• It will normalize surveillance  
• I can't op t out or consent  
• It will be misused or hacked  
• Other (specify)  
• Don't know  
 
 