Bilingualism: Language and Cognition
http://journals.cambridge.org/BIL
Additional services for Bilingualism: Language and Cognition:
Email alerts: Click here 
Subscriptions: Click here 
Commercial reprints: Click here 
Terms of use : Click here
The architecture of the bilingual word recognition system: From
identication to decision 
Ton Dijkstra and Walter J.B. van Heuven 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition / Volume 5 / Issue 03 / December 2002, pp 175 - 197 
DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902003012, Published online: 18 December 2002 
Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S1366728902003012
How to cite this article:
Ton Dijkstra and Walter J.B. van Heuven (2002). The architecture of the bilingual word recognition system: From identication to
decision. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 5, pp 175-197 doi:10.1017/S1366728902003012 
Request Permissions : Click here
Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/BIL, IP address: 193.255.248.150 on 05 Feb 2015
http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150The architecture of the
bilingual word recognitionsystem: From identi®cationto decision *TON DIJKSTRA
WALTER J.B. VAN HEUVEN
NICI, University of Nijmegen
The paper opens with an evaluation of the BIA model of bilingual word recognition in the light of recent empirical
evidence. After pointing out problems and omissions, a new model, called the BIA+, is proposed. Structurally, this newmodel extends the old one by adding phonological and semantic lexical representations to the available orthographic ones,and assigns a different role to the so-called language nodes. Furthermore, it makes a distinction between the effects ofnon-linguistic context (such as instruction and stimulus list composition) and linguistic context (such as the semantic andsyntactic effects of sentence context), based on a distinction between the word identi®cation system itself and a task/decision system that regulates control. At the end of the paper, the generalizability of the BIA+ model to different tasksand modalities is discussed.
1 Introduction
In the last decade, there has been a strong increase in
the number of experimental studies investigating
aspects of bilingualism, in particular the bilingualmental lexicon. There are various reasons for thisupsurge of interest in the process of bilingual wordrecognition and the system that takes care of it. Forinstance, it raises issues that are not present inmonolinguals, such as how bilinguals distinguishwords from the two languages while reading or
listening. Furthermore, if monolingual and bilingual
word recognition re¯ects a common underlying pro-cessing system, bilingual research offers new ways oftesting hypotheses derived from the monolingualdomain. At the same time, an analysis of the bilingualword recognition system may enhance our under-standing of its monolingual counterpart. In fact, ifone assumes that recognition of words in different
languages is subserved by one system, the question
arises whether word recognition in one language canbe appropriately studied apart from other-languageknowledge. Yet another reason for investigating bi-lingual word recognition is that there are practical
* The authors thank Judy Kroll, David Green and Janet van Hell
for valuable discussion. They are also grateful to Marc Brysbaert,
Michael Thomas, Ping Li and an anonymous reviewer for theirextensive high-quality comments on an earlier version of thispaper. The proposed model was presented at the Third Inter-
national Symposium on Bilingualism in Bristol, UK (April, 19
2001).consequences to this research for educational pur-
poses (e.g., how to better teach a foreign language inthe classroom). Finally, because words are the basic
building blocks of sentences, it is important to under-
stand how words are recognized in a bilingualcontext as a prerequisite for understanding howsentences are parsed by bilinguals. For all theseresearch issues, reaching a detailed understanding ofthe bilingual word recognition system is an importantaim.
In 1998, we presented a model for bilingual word
recognition that was based on the empirical evidence
available at the time (Dijkstra and Van Heuven,1998; Dijkstra, Van Heuven and Grainger, 1998(a);Van Heuven, Dijkstra and Grainger, 1998; see alsoGrainger and Dijkstra, 1992). The model, called theBilingual Interactive Activation (BIA) model, wasconcerned with the recognition of orthographicrepresentations only. Nevertheless, because it was
implemented on the computer, it allowed a precise
simulation of the results of a series of experimentalstudies. Now, several years and many studies later, itis time to evaluate the model and to explore how itmay be updated and extended in the light of recentevidence.
In the following, we will ®rst summarize the BIA
model and discuss the major empirical phenomena
that it can account for. Next, we will discuss prob-
lems of the BIA model arising from limitations in itslexical and language representations, its handling ofcontext effects, and its lacking an implemented task
Address for correspondence
Ton Dijkstra, NICI, University of Nijmegen, P.O. Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands.E-mail: dijkstra@nici.kun.nlBilingualism: Language and Cognition 5 (3), 2002, 175±197 #2002 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902003012 175http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150structure. We will propose solutions to these prob-
lems that can be tested and implemented in futureversions of the model. These solutions imply a majorchange in the BIA model with respect to the languagenodes, as well as the addition of representations anda task/decision component. Because the new modelincorporates, to a large extent, the old BIA model,
we will call it the BIA+ model.
The BIA+ model makes a clear-cut distinction
between an encapsulated word identi®cation systemand a task/decision system, which accounts for alarger and more diverse set of empirical ®ndings.Linguistic information from input signal or (sen-tence) context may affect the word identi®cationsystem, while non-linguistic context information
(e.g., participants' expectations and strategies) in¯u-
ences parameter settings in the task/decision system.The new model assumes interactivity within the wordidenti®cation system and between this system andhigher-order systems such as the parser. However,the model also proposes that the lexical activationlevels within the word identi®cation system itself arenot affected by the task/decision system and, there-
fore, not by sources of non-linguistic information
either.
Apart from considering how words in stimulus
lists and sentence contexts are recognized, we willconsider to what extent assumptions of the basicmodel can be generalized to bilingual auditory wordrecognition and word production, and how a par-ticipant's performance is affected by the task at
hand.
2 The Bilingual Interactive Activation (BIA) model
Visual word recognition in the monolingual domain
has been de®ned as the retrieval of orthographicrepresentations from the mental lexicon corre-sponding to the input letter string (Grainger and
Dijkstra, 1996). It can be de®ned likewise in the
bilingual domain. However, two theoretical issuesarise in bilingual word recognition that do not applyin the monolingual case. First, during monolingualword recognition, word candidates become activatedthat are similar to the input string (Coltheart,Davelaar, Jonasson and Besner, 1977; Andrews,1989; Grainger and Segui, 1990). With respect to
bilingual word recognition, one can ask if lexical
candidates from both languages are activated in bi-lingual word recognition, or from one language only.In the empirical literature, these two positions withrespect to bilingual processing have been referred toas the language non-selective versus the languageselective access hypotheses.
A related second issue is whether the lexical repre-sentations of their two languages are stored together
in an integrated lexicon (irrespective of the languagethey belong to) or in different lexicons, separate foreach language. Basically, in an integrated lexicalsystem competition or selection effects may occurbetween lexical candidates of both languages,whereas in two separate lexical systems competition
effects are limited to candidates of one language
only.
This distinction between structural and processing
aspects of bilingual word recognition is not oftenmade in the bilingual literature. Generally, tworather than four theoretical view points have beencontrasted: language selective access in independentlexicons versus language non-selective access to an
integrated lexicon. The Bilingual Interactive Activa-
tion (BIA) model defends the second viewpoint byassuming that lexical access is basically non-selectivein nature and that the bilingual mental lexicon isintegrated across languages.
The BIA model, illustrated in Figure 1, shares the
basic architecture and parameter settings of themonolingual Interactive Activation model (Mc-
Clelland and Rumelhart, 1981). Apart from intro-
ducing an integrated Dutch and English lexicon, amajor extension is the addition of a representationallayer containing two ``language nodes'' that are con-nected to all the word nodes in both lexicons. Themodel implements top-down language-to-word in-hibition (see Figure 1). Throughout this article, twocrucial issues will be (a) whether the activity of the
language nodes is in¯uenced by non-linguistic infor-
mation sources from outside the word recognitionsystem, and (b) whether inside the system thelanguage nodes signi®cantly affect the activation(and therefore the recognition) of words presented instimulus lists or sentences. In the BIA model, weargued ``yes'' to both questions. For the BIA+model, we will revise our claims and argue ``no'' to
both (but we will further argue that syntactic and
semantic aspects of sentence context can affect the
recognition of a following target word).
When a string of letters is presented to the BIA
model, this visual input affects particular features ateach letter position, which subsequently excite lettersthat contain these features and at the same timeinhibit letters for which the features are absent. The
activated letters next excite words in both languages
in which the activated letter occurs at the position inquestion, while all other words are inhibited. At theword level, all words inhibit each other, irrespectiveof the language to which they belong. Activated wordnodes from the same language send activation on tothe corresponding language node, while activatedlanguage nodes send inhibitory feedback to all word176 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150nodes in the other language. The language nodes
collect activation from words in the language theyrepresent and inhibit active words of the otherlanguage. The activation of the language nodesre¯ects the amount of activity in each lexicon.
In the BIA model, the language nodes ful®ll four
main functions (Dijkstra and Van Heuven, 1998). In
the ®rst two functions, language nodes serve aslinguistic representations , in the last two as non-
linguistic functional mechanisms . First, the language
nodes serve as language tags , or language labels,
representations that indicate the language to whichan item belongs. These representations implement theobservation that mature language users know towhich language a particular word belongs. The need
for this type of representation has already beenmotivated decades ago (e.g., McCormack, 1977,p. 63). Second, language nodes collect activationfrom the lexical representations within a language. Acarry-over of such global lexical activation from one
trial to the next could account for between-trial
language priming effects (e.g., Grainger and
O'Regan, 1992) if one assumes that language nodesactivated by an item can affect word activation at thenext trial (top-down effect), or if decision criteria areaffected by the same/different language membershipof consecutive items (bottom-up effect).
1Third, the
language nodes serve as a functional mechanismmodulating relative language activation to account
for performance differences across experiments.
Thus, language nodes can function as a sort oflanguage ®lter (rather than an all-or-none language
switch). Fourth, it might be assumed that thelanguage nodes can collect context activation origi-nating from outside the word recognition system.Through contextual pre-activation , the language
nodes can account for potential top-down effects on
the lexical identi®cation system originating from,
e.g., the expectations of the participants with respectto the language(s) of the input materials to beprocessed.
For the last three functions, the BIA model
assumed that (by inhibiting non-target languagewords) the language nodes were able to facilitate theselection of words from the target language after
language non-selective access took place, but could
not enforce language selective lexical access from thevery beginning of word recognition. Indeed, simu-lations show that even with strong pre-activation ofthe language nodes and strong top-down effects tothe word level, word candidates from the surpressedlanguage can often be recognized.
Before we discuss a number of limitations and
problems of the BIA model, we will ®rst summarize
six types of empirical ®ndings that the BIA model hasbeen able to account for. We will restrict ourselves tothe bilingual domain (also see Dijkstra et al., 1998(a);for additional monolingual simulations, see VanHeuven, 2000; Van Heuven, Dijkstra, Grainger andSchriefers, 2001).Language
Word
Letter
Feature
Visual inputDutch English
Dutch
wordsEnglish
words
pos 1
pos 2 pos 3pos 4
pos 1
pos 2 pos 3pos 4
Figure 1. The Bilingual Interactive Activation (BIA) model
for bilingual word recognition. Arrowheads indicate
excitatory connections; black ®lled circles indicateinhibitory connections.
1This account implies that the speed of activation of each
language node depends on the number of items connected to that
node (thus on vocabulary size in the concerned language), and
on the (subjective) frequency of the word candidates involved.Such a mechanism is likely to fail if it is applied to beginningbilinguals without making additional assumptions (consider, for
instance, what happens if only one L2 word has been acquired).177 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.1502.1 Simulating neighborhood density effects within
and between languages
In neighborhood studies, it is investigated how the
recognition of a target word is affected by thenumber of words that are similar to it. These similarwords are called ``neighbors''. An orthographic
neighbor is any word differing by a single letter from
the target word respecting length and letter position(Coltheart et al., 1977). For instance, CORK andWORD are both neighbors of WORK. Monolingualword identi®cation and naming turn out to besensitive to the number (density) of neighbors andtheir frequency (Andrews, 1989; Grainger, O'Regan,Jacobs and Segui, 1989; Grainger and Segui, 1990;
Snodgrass and Mintzer, 1993). In bilingual studies,
effects of the number of orthographic neighbors wereused as indexes of the relative in¯uence of non-targetlanguage words on target word recognition in differ-ent experimental tasks and conditions. Target wordsthemselves belonged only to one language (i.e., therewere no interlingual homographs, homophones, orcognates in the stimulus list).
Because neighborhood density effects are assumed
to arise during word identi®cation, cross-languagemanipulation of neighbors allows a test of theindependent versus integrated lexicon hypothesis.According to the integrated lexicon hypothesis,recognition of a target word will be affected by bothtarget and non-target language neighbors, at leastwhen lexical access is language non-selective. Accord-
ing to an independent lexicon hypothesis, recognition
of the target word should not be affected by inter-lexical neighborhood density, because there are nodirect interactions between the two lexicons. Thus,only a non-selective-access integrated-lexicon modelsuch as BIA predicts that target word recognition isin¯uenced by orthographic neighbors from bothlanguages. Other models predict no effects of non-
target language neighborhood density on target word
recognition. As such, studies involving neighborhoodmanipulations offer a way to test the structural andprocessing issues discussed above at the same time.
In a series of progressive demasking and lexical
decision experiments involving Dutch-English bi-linguals, Van Heuven et al. (1998) examined neigh-borhood interference effects on target word
recognition. They manipulated the number of ortho-
graphic neighbors of target words in the same andthe other language of the bilinguals. Cross-linguistically, increasing the number of Dutch ortho-graphic neighbors systematically slowed downresponse times (RTs) for English target words.Within the target language itself, an increase inneighbors consistently produced inhibitory effects for
Dutch target words and facilitatory effects forEnglish target words. Monolingual English readersalso showed facilitation due to English neighbors,but no effects of Dutch neighbors. Why oppositeeffects were observed of English (facilitation) andDutch (inhibition) neighbors was not completely
clear, but may have been a consequence of differences
in the lexical organization of English and Dutch.Whatever explanation is favored, the results of thestudy indicate that during the presentation of a targetword, neighbors from both languages are activatedthat all affect target recognition. This is evidence thatthe lexicon of bilinguals is integrated and non-selective in nature, at least with respect to ortho-
graphic codes.
Van Heuven et al. (1998) and Dijkstra et al.
(1998(a)) showed that the empirically obtained neigh-borhood density effects could be simulated by theBIA model. A language non-selective access variantof the BIA model (without cross-linguistic top-downinhibition from the language nodes to the word level)already provided a good ®t to the data of four differ-
ent experiments when the English frequency range
was restricted (implicitly assuming a lower subjectivefrequency for English L2 words). However, theintroduction of asymmetric cross-linguistic top-downinhibition led to an even better ®t across the fourexperiments. This provides a demonstration of thethird function of the language nodes mentionedabove, namely that they help to account for differ-
ences across experiments. Interestingly enough, the
BIA model was able to account for the oppositeeffects of English and Dutch neighbors by using acombination of reduced English frequencies (relativeto Dutch) and asymmetric top-down inhibition.
2.2 Simulating shifting neighborhood effects across an
experiment
In one of their neighborhood density experiments,
involving the progressive demasking technique, VanHeuven et al. (1998) observed that the pattern of RTsin their neighborhood conditions (orthogonallymanipulating the number of neighbors in Dutch andEnglish) changed for high-pro®ciency participantsacross the four parts of the experiment. In this
blocked experiment, some participants saw the Dutch
items ®rst, while others saw them only after theEnglish items. An inhibitory effect of English neigh-borhood size on Dutch target identi®cation wasobserved, which decreased when the English itemshad been presented earlier. Thus, the Dutch RTswere strongly inhibited by the number of English178 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150neighbors when the Dutch words were presented in
the ®rst block. The effect was especially strong in the®rst half of the ®rst block, but was reduced in thesecond half. For the group of participants who sawthe Dutch words only after the English words, theeffect of English neighbors was reduced even furtherand turned into facilitation in the last half of the
second block. This ®nding suggested that high-pro®-
ciency participants in some way modulated the rela-tive contribution of the two languages. In thebeginning of the experiment, participants expectedtheir English pro®ciency to be tested and thereforekept their English lexicon in an active state(Grosjean, 1997). After being tested with Englishwords, they could focus on the Dutch task and the
relative activation of English may have dropped.
This account was supported by simulations with
the BIA model in which only the settings were variedof the parameter that controlled the amount ofinhibition exerted by the language nodes on the wordlevel. Increasing the amount of asymmetric top-downinhibition across time from zero to larger values, thepattern of results could be ®tted quite well. This can
be considered as a demonstration of the fourth
function of the language nodes discussed above.
2.3 Simulating masked priming effects in bilinguals
The BIA model has also been able to simulate the
effects of masked orthographic priming within andbetween languages observed in a study by Bijeljac-
Babic, Biardeau and Grainger (1997). In this study,
French-English bilinguals made lexical decisions toL1 or L2 target words preceded by masked ortho-graphic prime words from the same or a differentlanguage. In their ®rst experiment, the targetlanguage was English, in the second experiment itwas French. The target words in both experimentswere low-frequency words or nonwords that were
orthographically legal and pronounceable. The prime
words were high-frequency words (presented for 57ms) that either belonged to the same language as thetarget words or to the other language. In bothexperiments it was found that when prime andlanguage were from the same language, target worddecision times were inhibited for orthographicallyrelated primes relative to orthographically dissimilar
primes. For example, when the target language was
English, the prime-target combination ``real ±HEAL'' led to slower RTs than the combination``roof ± HEAL''. This ®nding suggests that anyfacilitation effects that might arise due to formpriming (overlap in letters) were annihilated byinhibition effects due to lexical competition. Morerelevant, however, is that when prime and target were
words from different languages (``beau ± BEAM''),inhibition effects were found as well. This indicatesthat lexical knowledge from the other languageaffected target recognition, which provides evidencesupporting language non-selective access to the bi-lingual lexicon. The response patterns of high-
pro®cient bilinguals showed a considerable within-
language inhibitory priming effect (28 ms) and atrend towards even larger cross-language inhibition(43 ms).
To simulate these results, a combined French±
English lexicon was incorporated in the BIA model(Dijkstra et al., 1998(a)). Subsequently, standardmodel simulations were run with a ®xed recognition
threshold. At the ®rst processing cycle, the prime
word was presented to the model and at the thirdcycle it was replaced by the target word. In corre-spondence with the empirical data, the model pro-duced longer average RTs in the within-languageprime condition and the trend towards larger in-hibition effects in the between-language primecondition. Note that it was not necessary to assume
top-down inhibition effects (asymmetric or other-
wise) from the language nodes to the word level toproduce these inhibition effects.
2.4 Simulating L2-pro®ciency differences in masked
priming with bilinguals
In the second masked priming experiment of their
study, Bijeljac-Babic et al. (1997) examined the data
patterns for three different L2-pro®ciency groups.The pattern for more advanced bilinguals was thesame as described above: clear inhibition effects inthe related prime condition relative to the unrelatedcontrol condition. Beginning bilinguals, however,showed smaller RT differences between the relatedand unrelated priming conditions, while there were
no priming effects in monolinguals. The BIA model
was able to simulate the three patterns of resultswhen it was assumed that the monolinguals knew afew words of the foreign language (English) after all(Dijkstra et al., 1998(a)). If the monolinguals reallydid not have any foreign knowledge, the L2 wordsshould be treated as nonwords and according to theBIA model, this should have produced a facilitation
effect in the related condition relative to the unrelated
condition (due to form overlap), rather than a null-effect. (Such masked priming facilitation effects formonolinguals and beginning bilinguals have indeedbeen observed in other recent work in our labora-tory). Note that again simulations were simple; notop-down inhibition was assumed.179 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.1502.5 Simulating effects for interlingual homographs in
a go/no-go task
Many bilingual word recognition studies investi-
gating the issue of (non-)selective access have usedinterlingual homographs or cognates as stimulusmaterials. Interlingual homographs in a strict de®ni-
tion are words that are identical across languages
with respect to their orthography but not theirmeaning (nor, most often, their phonology). Otherterms used are ``interlexical homographs'' or ``falsefriends''. An example is a word like ROOM, whichmeans ``cream'' in Dutch. Cognates are de®ned hereas words from two languages that are identical inorthographic form and largely overlap in meaning,
such as FILM in Dutch and English. The argument-
ation for using interlingual homographs and cognatesin bilingual research has been as follows. Considerthe Dutch-English interlingual homograph LIST(meaning ``trick'' in Dutch). If the recognition of theEnglish reading of the homograph by Dutch-Englishbilinguals is affected by the Dutch reading, thenresponse latencies should be different from those to
one-language control items that are matched to the
interlingual homograph in frequency, length andother characteristics (e.g., MILK). For instance, therequirement of selecting either the English or theDutch reading of a homograph might induce in-hibitory effects relative to a control. However, ifrecognition proceeds in a language selective way,then no RT differences between homographs and
controls would be expected, because the Dutch
reading of the interlingual homograph would not beactivated at all and would not affect lexical selectionbased on the English lexicon.
To investigate this issue, Dijkstra, Timmermans
and Schriefers (2000(b)) made use of a go/no-goparadigm. In this paradigm, participants had to reactonly when a presented word belonged to a prespeci®ed
target language. Participants reacted only when they
identi®ed either an English word (English go/no-go)or a Dutch word (Dutch go/no-go), but they did notrespond if a word of the non-target language (Dutchor English, respectively) was presented. The list ofpresented words consisted of a mixture of interlingualhomographs and one- language Dutch and Englishcontrol groups. The participants were informed that
some of the words in the list could be both English
and Dutch: interlingual homographs. Such homo-graphs could belong to three types: high-frequent inEnglish (HE) and low-frequent in Dutch (LD); low-frequent in English (LE) and high-frequent in Dutch(HD); and low-frequent in both languages. Examplesof words in the three groups are LIST (HE/LD),BRAND (LE/HD) and GIST (LE/LD).In both go/no-go tasks, clear inhibition effects
arose for homographs relative to one-language con-trols. Even in the Dutch go/no-go task for Dutch-English bilinguals performing in their nativelanguage, participants were unable to completelyexclude effects from the non-target language onhomograph identi®cation. Target-language homo-
graphs were often ``overlooked'', especially if the
frequency of their other-language competitor washigh. In the Dutch go/no-go task, participants didnot respond to low-frequency items belonging totheir native language in about 25 percent of the cases!Inspection of cumulative distributions showed that ifthey did not respond after about 1500±1600 ms, theydid not respond within the time window of two
seconds anymore.
To simulate these results with the BIA model, it
was assumed that a homograph is represented in themental lexicon twice, once for each language(Dijkstra and Van Heuven, 1998). Each representa-tion has a resting level activation depending on itsfrequency of occurrence in the language that itbelongs to. Furthermore, these representations
compete with words of both languages in a standard
fashion. Using asymmetric top-down inhibition fromthe Dutch language node to English words, thepattern of correct responses (in percentages) forhomographs and control words in the three fre-quency conditions of the Dutch go task was repro-duced by the BIA model reasonably well. Thepercentage of correct responses was clearly dependent
on the relative frequency of both readings of the
interlingual homographs. However, simulating theresponse times for the different types of homographsturned out to be more dif®cult.
2.6 Simulating language of previous item effects
Von Studnitz and Green (1997) had German-English
bilinguals perform a generalized lexical decision task,
in which they gave a ``yes'' response if a presenteditem belonged to German or English, and a ``no''response if it was a nonword. Words in the list weresometimes preceded by other words from the samelanguage, and sometimes by words from the otherlanguage. Von Studnitz and Green observed that thebilinguals' RTs on switch trials were a signi®cant
17 ms slower than on non-switch trials. Signi®cant
language switching effects of considerable size werealso found in a reanalysis of the generalized lexicaldecision data of the Van Heuven et al. (1998) neigh-borhood study as well. Dutch words preceded bynonwords (571 ms) were responded to faster thanthose preceded by English words (586 ms) and slowerthan those preceded by Dutch words (556 ms).180 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150English words preceded by nonwords (621 ms) were
responded to faster than those preceded by Dutchwords (641 ms) and slower than those preceded byEnglish words (606 ms).
In a psychophysical study with themselves as the
two participants, Grainger and O'Regan (1992) madelexical decisions to repeatedly presented words of
four letters and nonwords that were preceded by
unrelated French and English prime words. Atpresentation durations for which the primes could beidenti®ed, language prime effects arose that could beaccounted for by assuming that primes from a differ-ent language interfered with target processing.
Such ®ndings can, in principle, be explained in
terms of the BIA model by assuming that, due to the
interaction of the language nodes with the ortho-
graphic lexical representations, target word recog-nition is affected differently by preceding words fromthe same and from another language (Dijkstra, VanJaarsveld and Ten Brinke, 1998(b), p. 63±64). Forinstance, on trial t an English word would activatethe English language node, and on trial t + 1, thislanguage node would feed activation back to all
English words and/or inhibit all words from the
Dutch lexicon. This hypothesis could hold for bothtypes of studies just reviewed, including item pairsacross trials (``previous item effects'') or within-trialprime-target pairs (e.g., in unmasked or maskedpriming). However, because evidence from severalrecent studies (Von Studnitz and Green, 1997, 2002;Thomas and Allport, 2000) indicates that the major
source of switch costs must be positioned outside the
mental lexicon, this account is probably not correct(see also section 4.8).
3 Limitations and problems of the BIA model
Thus, in spite of the successful simulations of the
BIA model described in the previous section,
empirical studies suggest that some of the proposed
mechanisms with respect to consecutive item effectsand language switching may be wrong. In addition,there are many aspects of bilingual word recognitionthat are not fully accounted for by the model. Tomention just a few of these:.there are no phonological or semantic representa-
tions in the model;
.the representation of interlingual homographs and
cognates is underspeci®ed;
.representational and functional aspects with
respect to the language nodes are confounded;
.there is only a very limited account of how non-
linguistic and linguistic contexts affect bilingualword recognition;
.there is no detailed description of how participantsperform a particular task, for instance lexical
decision;
.the relationship between word identi®cation and
task demands is underspeci®ed.The majority of points in this list call for the
extension of the BIA model with additional repre-sentations and processing components. In addition,
the model must be differentiated and adapted with
respect to the language node representations. In thefollowing sections, we will describe the revised model,which we will call the BIA+ model. To the extentthat the BIA model is ``nested'' in the BIA+ model,the earlier simulations on the basis of orthographicrepresentations only are still valid for the BIA+model. However, as we shall see, implementing
lexical phonological and semantic representations
computationally poses serious problems, and suchimplementation problems are even more serious forthe task/decision component (in fact, at present thereis no available monolingual model that has incorpo-rated both aspects in a satisfactory way). We will,therefore, at this moment, follow Green (1998) andGrosjean (1997) in providing only a verbal analysis
for these components of the model. We also ack-
nowledge that there are many other aspects of bi-lingual word recognition that should be considered inthe future (for instance, how the model woulddevelop over time and during learning), because theymight affect theoretical perspective and focus.
4 The BIA+ model for bilingual word recognition
The BIA+ model is graphically represented in Figure
2. It incorporates the BIA model as a special case,except that the function of the language nodes isadapted. The BIA+ model is also strongly affected byGreen's (1998) ideas on task schemas and taskcontrol. This is evident in the distinction between aword identi®cation system and a task/decision
system. Green's (1998) Inhibitory Control (IC) model
speci®es the control that bilinguals have over theprocessing in their lexico-semantic system in differenttask conditions. Both Green (1998) and Dijkstra(1998) have pointed out that the relationship betweenthe IC model and the BIA model is rather comple-mentary, with a larger focus on the task schema andbilingual language production in the IC model and
on the bilingual lexico-semantic system and compre-
hension in the BIA model.
In separate sections, we will consider the BIA+
model with respect to the following points: (1) Repre-sentation and processing of orthographic, phono-logical and semantic codes; (2) Representation ofinterlingual homographs and cognates; (3) Languagenodes; (4) Linguistic context effects; (5) Non-lin-181 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150guistic context effects; (6) Relationship between word
identi®cation and task demands; (7) Stimulus-response binding in lexical decision; (8) Stimulus-response binding in language switching.
4.1 Representation and processing of orthographic,
phonological and semantic codes
Just like the BIA model, the BIA+ model proposes
that the bilingual lexicon is integrated acrosslanguages and is accessed in a language non-selectiveway. However, the BIA+ model extends theseassumptions from orthographic representations tophonological and semantic representations. In other
words, bilingual word recognition is affected not only
by cross-linguistic orthographic similarity effects, butalso by cross-linguistic phonological and semanticoverlap. This is in line with several recent studiesdemonstrating profoundly language non-selectiveeffects with respect to all three codes (e.g., Dijkstra,Grainger and Van Heuven, 1999; Jared and Kroll,2001).Implementing phonological and semantic repre-
sentations in an interactive activation model,however, poses serious problems for the modeler.For instance, in English the mapping between letters(graphemes) and phonemes is context sensitive, im-plying that a sublexical representation in terms ofsuch units alone will not suf®ce. This is a well-known
problem in the monolingual domain, for which
several tentative solutions have been proposed(Dijkstra, in press). In a recent interactive activationmodel for monolingual word recognition, weincluded a new representational layer of orthographicand phonological representations as a solution to thisproblem, using the so-called Onset±Nucleus±Coda(ONC) scheme for both code types (Plaut, Mc-
Clelland, Seidenberg and Patterson, 1996; Van
Heuven, 2000). According to this scheme, a word likeSTRAND, for instance, can be represented by anonset cluster STR, a vowel nucleus A, and a codaND. Assuming this type of representation for bothorthography and phonology simpli®es the imple-mentation of a context sensitive mapping between thetwo types of codes. Preliminary simulation work
indicates that this implementation type is successful
in accounting for phonological effects (e.g., consist-ency effects) in monolingual word recognition, butmore work is necessary to assess the feasibility of thisapproach for implementing phonological codes in theBIA+ model.
Activation of orthographic codes
When an input letter string is presented to the BIA+
model, the ®rst stages of word recognition proceed inthe same fashion as in the BIA model. A number oflexical orthographic candidates are activated inparallel depending on their similarity to the inputstring, and on the resting level activation of theindividual items (and therefore dependent on sub-jective frequency, recency of use, L2 pro®ciency,
etc.). Because L2 representations are on average of a
lower subjective frequency than L1 codes, they areactivated somewhat more slowly than L1 representa-tions. Next, activated orthographic word candidatesactivate their corresponding phonological, semanticand other (e.g., articulatory) representations.
According to the model it is the similarity of the
input word to the internal lexical representations that
determines their activation, not the word's language
membership. The larger the overlap between theinput string and a representation in the mentallexicon, the more the internal representation is acti-vated. As a consequence, in the case of two languageswith alphabetical writing systems, the number ofactivated orthographic candidates is determined byfactors such as the neighborhood density and fre-· Specific processing steps for task in hand
· Receives continuous input from the
  identification system
· Decision criteria determine when a
  response is made based on relevant  codesTask schema
Identification system
L1/L2Language nodes
Lexical Orthography
Sublexical OrthographySemantics
Lexical Phonology
Sublexical Phonology
Figure 2. The BIA+ model for bilingual word recognition.
Arrows indicate activation ¯ows between representational
pools. Inhibitory connections within pools are omitted.
Language nodes could instead be attached to lemmarepresentations between word form and meaningrepresentations. Non-linguistic context only affects the task
schema level.182 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150quency of the target word and its within- and
between-language neighbors. If the two languagesdiffer with respect to their input codes (e.g., lettersets), the activated set of neighbors may becomemuch smaller. For instance, assume that a presenteditem contains language speci®c bigrams or diacriticalmarkers. Due to their presence, the initial set of
lexical candidates that is activated may become
restricted to one language (cf. Mathey and Zagar,2000, p. 200). This is a bottom-up effect. We deem itunlikely that for words that are well-known by thebilingual this kind of information is often used in atop-down way (e.g., the bilingual noticing a par-ticular language speci®c bigram and using it forlanguage decision), because the bottom-up recog-
nition process will usually be much faster. (Of course,
if all German words in a language decision task beginwith a capital letter, then participants can rede®nethe task of responding to words as one in which theyrespond to capital letters.)
Note that it follows logically that no ``ortho-
graphically similar'' word candidates can be activatedacross language pairs that do not share orthography
at all (e.g., Chinese and English), even though effects
of phonological similarity might still occur for suchlanguage pairs. In other words, when particular inputaspects are language speci®c, we will (of course) ®ndevidence of language speci®c access (e.g., Chineseorthography will not induce much Latin letteractivation).
For interlingual homographs and cognates with
different orthographic forms (and therefore two
representations) across languages, the degree of codeactivation of the non-target reading also depends onthe degree of cross-linguistic code overlap (seesection 4.2). This raises the question of how recog-nition of the Dutch word TOMAAT by Dutch-English bilinguals is affected by its similarity butnon-identity to the English word TOMATO. Van
Hell and Dijkstra (in press) had trilinguals with
Dutch as their L1, English as their L2 and French astheir L3 perform a word association task or a lexicaldecision task in their L1. Stimulus words were(mostly) non-identical cognates such as TOMAAT ornoncognates. Shorter association and lexical decisiontimes were observed for Dutch-English cognates thanfor noncognates. For trilinguals with a higher pro®-
ciency in French, lexical decision responses were
faster for both Dutch-English and Dutch-Frenchcognates. Thus, even when their orthographic andphonological overlap across languages is incomplete,cognates may be recognized faster than noncognates.
For French-Spanish bilinguals, Font (2001) has
found that in lexical decision cognates differing inone letter between languages (called by her ``neighborcognates'') are still facilitated but signi®cantly less so
than identical cognates. Furthermore, the amount offacilitation observed depended on the position of thedeviating letter in the word. Neighbor cognatesdiffering at the end of the word (e.g., French TEXTE± Spanish TEXTO) were facilitated more than neigh-bor cognates with the different letter inside (e.g.,
French USUEL ± Spanish USUAL). In fact, facili-
tatory effects for the latter type of cognate dis-appeared and effects tended towards inhibition whensuch cognates were of low frequency in bothlanguages. Similar patterns of results were found inL1 and L2 processing. These results suggest that thesize of cognate and interlingual homograph effectsdepends on their degree of cross-linguistic overlap
(cf. Cristoffanini, Kirshner and Milech, 1986), just
like the BIA+ model predicts. However, in order toaccount for position-speci®c effects of mismatches,the letter to word connections in the BIA+ modelmust be differentiated with respect to position, or anew letter coding scheme must be introduced (alsosee Dijkstra, in press).
Activation of phonological and semantic codes
When (sublexical and lexical) orthographic represent-ations become active, they start to activate associatedphonological and semantic representations. As aconsequence, such phonological and semantic repre-sentations of both languages are activated slightlylater during word reading than the orthographicrepresentations of these languages (Ferrand and
Grainger, 1993). Because their activation will
depend, among other factors, on subjective fre-quency, this implies that L2 phonological andsemantic codes will be delayed in activation relativeto L1 codes. We will call this the ``temporal delayassumption''. However, the different codes will ofteninteract (resonate) over time and their respectiveidenti®cation will take place close in time. As a
consequence of time course differences, the relative
contribution of codes to the decision may bemodulated by adapting temporal deadlines ratherthan by re®guring the task schema. For instance,when pseudohomophones are present in a mono-lingual stimulus list, phonological effects could beattenuated or excluded by speeding up RTs andbasing the response on the orthographic representa-
tion only. However, mutual activation of different
codes may make phonological effects dif®cult toeliminate.
Two consequences of the temporal delay assump-
tion are that (1) cross-linguistic effects will generallybe larger from L1 to L2 than in the opposite direc-tion; (2) an absence of cross-linguistic phonologicaland semantic effects for different words could occur183 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150if task demands allow responding to faster codes (for
instance, orthographic L1 codes), giving slower codesno chance to affect the response times.
2The system-
atic task dependence of cross-linguistic effects isshown clearly in a number of recent empirical studies(e.g., Dijkstra et al., 1998(b); Dijkstra, Grainger andVan Heuven, 1999; Lemho Èfer and Dijkstra, sub-
mitted).
We will illustrate this point by comparing the
study by Dijkstra et al. (1999) with that by Lemho Èfer
and Dijkstra (submitted). Dijkstra, et al. (1999)examined the effects of different types of codeoverlap in interlingual homographs and cognate pro-cessing. Dutch-English bilinguals performed anEnglish lexical decision task with English words
varying in their degree of orthographic (O), phono-
logical (P), and semantic (S) overlap with Dutchwords. Their six different test conditions are exempli-®ed by the following items: ``hotel'' (overlap in S, Oand P codes), ``type'' (SO), ``news'' (SP), ``step'' (OP),``stage'' (O) and ``note'' (P). The ®rst two conditions(SOP and SO conditions) may be called ``cognates'',while the last three conditions contain ``interlingual
homographs'' (OP and O conditions) and ``inter-
lingual homophones'' (P condition). Lexical decisionswere facilitated by cross-linguistic orthographic andsemantic similarity relative to control words thatbelonged only to English. In contrast, phonologicaloverlap produced inhibitory effects. A very similarpattern of results was found using a different task(progressive demasking), but no systematic differ-
ences between test and control conditions arose for
American English monolinguals.
We conclude that in this English lexical decision
task, where L2 (English) was the target language,cross-linguistic effects arose for L1-L2 (Dutch-English) homographs with respect to all three typesof representations. Because English was the targetlanguage in this task, a proper or safe task execution
implied verifying the English language membership
of possible word candidates, even when Dutch codeswould have become available faster than Englishones. In other words, Dutch codes had time toestablish themselves and exert effects on later avail-able English codes that were necessary forresponding.
Lemho Èfer and Dijkstra (submitted) presented the
same stimulus materials to Dutch-English bilinguals
in a generalized lexical decision task. In this task,
participants responded with ``yes'' to both Englishand Dutch words, but with ``no'' to nonwords. In
contrast to English lexical decision, participants inthis task can use both Dutch and English lexicalrepresentations as a reliable basis for responding.Thus, in this task, cross-linguistic effects will ariseonly to the extent that L1 and L2 codes can affecteach other before the fastest codes (usually Dutch
ones, according to the temporal delay assumption)
are retrieved and responded to. The results of thisstudy were straightforward: no facilitation effectsarose for interlingual homographs relative to con-trols, while cognates were facilitated. The pattern ofresults for homographs indicates that responses werebased upon the fastest available code, usually theDutch orthographic code, while cross-linguistic
overlap with respect to semantics in the case of
cognates apparently can be used to speed up theresponse. This implies a special type of representationfor cognates, possibly with a strong feedback connec-tion from semantics to orthography (cf. Pecher, 2001;Reimer, Brown and Lorsbach, 2001).
The result patterns of the two studies are
accounted for in the BIA+ model by assuming that
the task differences can lead to a different use of
lexical codes while the activation pattern in the wordidenti®cation system itself is not changed. Thisassumption is more parsimonious (and easier to test)than the assumption of changes in both identi®cationand task/decision systems (an assumption that ismade by the BIA model).
4.2 Representation of interlingual homographs and
cognates
Because the BIA model included only orthographic
representations, simulations involving orthographic-ally identical interlingual homographs could only beconducted if two representations were assumed forsuch items (see section 2.5). This choice, however,
was practically motivated and not based on solid
empirical evidence. Note that multiple representa-tions for form-identical items are not necessarilyincompatible with an integrated lexicon account,even though they ®t more naturally within a bilingualword recognition account that assumes separatelexicons for each language. In this section, we willinvestigate this issue in some detail. As an example,
do ROOM (a Dutch-English interlingual homo-
graph) and FILM (a Dutch-English cognate) haveshared or distinct representations in English andDutch?
A comparison of recent studies suggests that
orthographically identical interlingual homographshave distinct orthographic representations in eachlanguage (Dijkstra et al., 1998(b); Dijkstra et al.,
2There are several other ways in which these null-effects may have
arisen. They may, for instance, be due to participant strategies orthe effects of different codes (e.g., orthography and phonology)
may cancel each other.184 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.1501999; Lemho Èfer and Dijkstra, submitted). In the
previous section, we discussed the study by Dijkstraet al. (1999), who found cross-linguistic effects forL1-L2 (Dutch-English) homographs with respect toorthographic, phonological and semantic codes in abilingual lexical decision task where L2 (English) wasthe target language. Dijkstra et al. (1998(b)) manipu-
lated a different aspect of interlingual homographs,
the relative frequency of the two readings of thehomographs. In their second experiment, Dutch-English bilinguals also performed an English lexicaldecision on interlingual homographs, exclusivelyEnglish control items, and nonwords. The experi-mental stimuli also included Dutch words requiring a``no'' response (i.e., the Dutch words had to be
treated as ``English nonwords''). Relative to English
control items, strong inhibitory effects were obtainedfor interlingual homographs that were dependent onthe relative frequency difference of the two readingsof the homograph. The inhibitory effect was largewhen the Dutch reading of the homographs had ahigh frequency relative to the English reading.
The results of these two studies are paradoxical.
On the one hand, the observed cross-linguistic facili-
tatory effects for orthographic identity and semanticoverlap in interlingual homographs suggest that suchrepresentations are shared for items occurring in twolanguages. Shared representations for interlingualhomographs within an integrated lexicon ®t wellwithin an interactive activation account of bilingualword recognition. On the other hand, the observed
differential contributions of the Dutch and English
frequencies of interlingual homographs in the secondstudy suggest that these items have different lexicalrepresentations, each characterized by its frequencyin the language it belongs to.
Is there any evidence that allows us to distinguish
views that assume one (orthographic) representationor two (orthographic) representations for interlingual
homographs? If there is only one orthographic repre-
sentation, (orthographic) frequency effects should becumulative under circumstances in which both read-ings of the homograph can be used for responding.This should be the case then in a generalized lexicaldecision task, such as that of Experiment 3 in Dijk-stra et al. (1998(b)). In this task, participants canrespond to the fastest identi®ed reading of the inter-
lingual homograph and do not need to make a
distinction in order to perform the task. The one-representation hypothesis predicts, ®rst, that theresponses to interlingual homographs should befaster than the fastest of the control conditions.Second, the cumulative frequency effect should beespecially visible if, keeping the frequency of onereading of the homograph constant, the frequency ofthe other reading is varied. The obtained result
pattern, however, was not in line with this view. Firstof all, the facilitation effect for the HFE-LFD con-dition is only 9 ms relative to the English controlcondition, and for the HFE-HFD condition just 12ms relative to the Dutch control condition. Further-more, for the LFE-HFD condition a 22 ms inhibition
effect arose relative to the fast Dutch control con-
dition, and for the LFE-LFD condition even 28 msof inhibition arose. The relatively small facilitation inthe ®rst two conditions could be accounted for byassuming that the cumulative frequency effects areonly limited because log frequency rather than fre-quency is important; however, the inhibitory resultsfor the low-frequency conditions cannot be explained
in such a way.
The available results are easier to account for in
the two-representations view because, according tothis view, responses to interlingual homographscannot only be slower than to controls, but to alimited extent also faster as an effect of ``statisticalfacilitation'' (Raab, 1962). Statistical facilitation canarise if the response time is determined by the ®rst
available reading of the homograph. In most trials
this would be that of the high-frequency reading ofthe homograph, but sometimes the low-frequencyreading might win the race, making the resultingmean RT just somewhat faster than that of the high-frequency control (also see Lemho Èfer and Dijkstra,
submitted).
What can be said about the representation of
cognates, i.e. interlingual homographs that have both
orthographic and meaning overlap across language?The available studies suggest that cognates have aspecial representation. Apart from the studies by VanHell and Dijkstra (in press), Dijkstra et al. (1999) andLemho Èfer and Dijkstra (submitted) that we have
already discussed, there are many earlier studiessupporting this suggestion. For instance, Kirsner and
colleagues (e.g., Lalor and Kirsner, 2000), and
SaÂnchez-Casas and colleagues (e.g., Sa Ânchez-Casas,
Davis and Garcã Âa-Albea, 1992) have proposed that
cognates may have a common morphemic represent-ation across languages. However, more detailedinformation with respect to the relationship betweentheir orthographic, phonological and semantic codesis necessary before a complete cognate representation
can be implemented.
To conclude, the presently available evidence
favors the view that interlingual homographs arerepresented by two (possibly partially overlapping)representations rather than one. Thus, it seemsreasonable to continue with BIA+ simulationsassuming two representations for interlingual homo-graphs rather than one. Additional evidence about185 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150cognate representation is necessary in order to imple-
ment these in models like BIA+.
4.3 Language nodes
In section 2, we discussed the various functions of the
language nodes in the BIA model. We made two
distinctions: between linguistic and non-linguistic
functions of the language nodes, and betweenbottom-up (word to language) and top-down(language to word) components of these functions. Inan earlier paper on the BIA model (Dijkstra and VanHeuven, 1998), we already indicated that combiningall these aspects in one mechanism was probably tooambitious. Since that time, evidence has accrued
suggesting that the linguistic and non-linguistic func-
tions of the language nodes must be assigned todifferent levels of processing and that they mayoperate in a different way. More speci®cally, wepropose to restrict the language nodes' functions tolanguage membership representations within theidenti®cation system of which the activation levelalso re¯ects global lexical activity (because all acti-
vated words of one language feed activation forward
to a language node). Being just representations, thelanguage nodes can no longer function as language®lters dependent on experimental factors nor ascollectors of non-linguistic contextual pre-activation.
Differences between result patterns across experi-
ments and non-linguistic context effects now need tobe accounted for at a different level. We propose that
these effects arise at the level of task speci®cation and
parameter settings for the decision in a task (seeFigure 2). In other words, we propose a distinctionbetween a word identi®cation system and a task/decision system, analogous to Green (1998). Cross-experimental differences, cross-trial differences orparticipant expectations may be handled by adecision mechanism affecting the output of the word
identi®cation system before the response is made.
This proposal changes the nature of the language
nodes, but they remain present as a useful constructin the model. Language users know to whichlanguage a word belongs, so there must be some sortof language tag or language membership representa-tion. In language decision, participants are assumedto retrieve this representation to decide whether they
should push one button or another. They cannot do
this just by identifying the item, because even thoughit may very clearly belong to one language only, it isnot clear which language that is before the tag hasbeen retrieved. The language membership infor-mation could be retrieved via the item's lexeme(orthographic or phonological) or lemma (moreabstract syntactic/semantic) representation. For thesake of simplicity, the model currently does not
incorporate lemma representations, implying that thelanguage nodes are directly connected to lexical formrepresentations. According to this viewpoint, therelative activation of the language nodes (somewould say ``of the languages'') is completely depend-ent upon activation arriving from other linguistic
representations, e.g., current lexical input and pre-
vious sentence context.
Studies indicate that language information
becomes available rather late during (isolated) bi-lingual visual word recognition, usually too late toaffect the word selection process. An example is thestudy by Dijkstra et al. (2000(b)), discussed alreadyin section 2.5. Target-language homographs were
often ``overlooked'' in a language go/no-go task if the
frequency of their other-language component washigh. A ¯attening of the cumulative RT distributiontowards an asymptotic value in these experimentssuggests that recognition of the homograph readingfrom the non-target language in some way ``prohib-ited'' the subsequent recognition of the targetlanguage reading (e.g., after recognition, all other
lexical candidates may be suppressed). Thus, selec-
tion of one reading of the interlingual homographstook place rather late during processing. Clearly, thesystem must at some time select only one lexical item,but apparently the language of that item could notaid that selection. More likely, determination of theitem's language depended on lexical selection havingtaken place. In addition, it did not seem possible to
focus on the target reading only and discard the non-
target language reading. One reason for this may be atendency that the word rather than its language labeltriggers the response (see also section 4.7).
In section 4.5 we will discuss some other studies on
word reading that suggest that the in¯uence oflanguage membership on item recognition is rela-tively small, implying it is generally available too late
to affect word identi®cation. If this observation
proves to be true in further research, it means thatthe feedback parameter from language nodes to theword level must be set rather low. One may wonderhow this can come about in an interactive activationmodel such as BIA+. A possibility (borrowed fromthe monolingual language production literature) liesin the nature of the mapping between words and
language membership. Each word is connected to
one language node, but each language node is con-nected to thousands of words. Therefore, if theamount of activation that can be distributed betweenunits at different levels is a constant, the feedbackactivation from language node to word level will bemuch smaller per word unit than the feedforwardactivation from word level to language node.186 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.1504.4 Linguistic context effects
The BIA+ model makes a distinction between a word
identi®cation system incorporating linguistic repre-sentations, and a task/decision system incorporatingnon-linguistic task schema speci®cations (see Figure2). In line with this distinction, it is assumed that
linguistic context is able in principle to directly affect
the word identi®cation system, while non-linguisticcontext affects (settings in) the task/decision system.Linguistic context effects are de®ned here as theeffects arising from lexical, syntactic or semanticsources (e.g., sentence context), whereas non-linguistic context effects are those effects that arisefrom instruction, task demands or participant expec-
tancies.
3The automatically operating word identi®-
cation system is part of a much larger Language Usersystem in which sentence parsing and language pro-duction also have a place (Dijkstra and Kempen,1984; Levelt, Roelofs and Meyer, 1999). We proposethat the word identi®cation system is interactive notonly with respect to different codes but also relativeto the sentence parsing system. As a consequence,
BIA+ predicts that the recognition of words in
sentence context is sensitive to syntactic and semanticcontext information from different languages, in away that is analogous to monolingual word recogni-tion in sentence context. In fact, such linguisticcontext information may exert serious constraints onthe degree of language selective access that may beobserved.
At present, few studies have addressed the bi-
linguals' recognition of words in sentence context(Altarriba, Kroll, Sholl and Rayner, 1996; Li, 1996;Elston-Gu Èttler and Williams, submitted), but their
results are in line with this viewpoint. We will discusstwo of these here. In their ®rst experiment, Altarribaet al. monitored the eye movements of Spanish-English bilinguals while they were reading English
(L2) sentences that contained either an English (L2)
or a Spanish (L1) target word. Sentences providedeither high or low semantic constraints on the targetwords. An example sentence of the high constraintand Spanish target condition is ``He wanted todeposit all his dinero at the credit union'', where
dinero is Spanish for ``money''. The experiment led to
an interaction between the frequency of the target
word and degree of sentence constraint for Spanish
target words with respect to the ®rst ®xation dura-tion, but not for English target words. Thus, whenthe Spanish target words were of high frequency andappeared in highly constrained sentences, the partici-pants apparently experienced interference. This result
suggests that sentence constraint in¯uences not onlythe generation of semantic feature restrictions forupcoming words, but also that of lexical features.The high-frequency Spanish word matched the gener-ated set of semantic features, but not the expectedlexical features when the word appeared in the alter-
nate language (Altarriba et al., 1996, p. 483). The
same pattern of results was found in a second experi-ment, where the sentences were presented word byword using the rapid serial visual presentation(RSVP) technique and participants named thecapitalized target word in each sentence.
The ®ndings of this study are in line with the
BIA+ model from at least two perspectives. First,
linguistic sentence context was found to interact with
target word recognition, as predicted by the model.Second, note that the observed data pattern showedan interaction of word frequency (a lexical infor-mation source) and the sentence constraint, and notof language membership and the sentence constraint.This suggests that ( just like for isolated words)lexical characteristics are more important than
language characteristics in the determination of word
recognition in sentences.
Future studies should focus on disentangling such
effects of lexical form features and language member-ship in sentence processing experiments. They shouldexamine, for instance, to which extent the languageitself of preceding words in the sentence can modu-late the activation of target word candidates from a
non-target language. Two viewpoints can be con-
trasted. One option is that the language nodes can bepre-activated by the sentence context and mayfunction as a link between sentence and lexical levels.Via this link, the language of the preceding sentencecontext could affect the recognition of a target itemindependent of any additional syntactic or semanticeffects. Another option is that such preactivation will
not be effective, because language nodes cannot
activate or suppress word activation to any consider-able extent. This second option currently seems to bethe most in line with the BIA+ model (and the studyby Altarriba et al.), because it ®ts the argument putforward in section 4.3 that language informationdoes not provide strong selection constraints onbilingual word recognition.
The second study we will discuss here is that by
Elston-Gu Èttler and Williams (submitted). It is of
direct relevance to the BIA+ model, because theycompared the bilingual processing of interlingualhomographs in isolated word lists (see sections 2.5,2.6 and 4.2) to that of the same stimulus materialsincorporated in sentences. The authors ®rst showedthat, in word lists, visually-presented German-
3Effects of stimulus list composition could, in principle, derive
from both sources.187 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150English interlingual homographs primed lexical
decisions on the English translation of their Germanreading (cf. De Moor, 1998; Van Heste, 1999). Forexample, the interlingual homograph ``gift'' primedthe target word ``poison''. Next, the prime word wasincorporated as the last word in a sentence like ``Thewoman gave her friend an expensive gift''. At a
stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) of 250 ms after the
prime word, the target word ``poison'' was presented.In other conditions, the target item was a nonword.As before, the participants performed a lexicaldecision task on the target item. In contrast to thesigni®cant single word priming, no signi®cantpriming was obtained when the primes occurred insentence contexts biased towards their English
reading. As discussed above, such a result is not
incompatible with the assumption of the BIA+ modelthat sentence context can interact with the bilingualword identi®cation process.
In a second experiment, Elston-Gu Èttler and
Williams examined cases of L1-L2 relationship occur-ring at a deeper level than the form-level relationsexamined in Experiment 1. Using the same procedure
as before, they presented German-English bilinguals
with a sentence such as ``The lawyer tried very hardto defend his client in court'', followed by a targetword like ``meal''. In this case, the prime ``court'' canbe translated into German as ``Gericht''. TheGerman word ``Gericht'' is ambiguous, and can alsomean ``meal''. Interestingly enough, priming effectswere now obtained in both the single-word and
sentence conditions. The authors argued that this
suggests that L1 representations that are activated bytranslation links are less resistant to sentence andlanguage context constraints than those that dependon form-level similarity.
The results of this study are to a considerable
extent compatible with those obtained in the mono-lingual domain. Studies by Swinney and others (e.g.,
Swinney, 1979; Tanenhaus, Leiman and Seidenberg,
1979) originally suggested that even in the presenceof a strong biasing context, both readings of (intra-lingual) homographs were brie¯y activated. Laterresearch has complicated this picture by showing thatthe more frequent (dominant) meaning of an ambigu-ous word may be more accessible than the other one(e.g., Duffy, Morris and Rayner, 1988), and that
sentential context may make the non-dominant
meaning as accessible as the dominant one (Lucas,1999). Furthermore, under some conditions, only thecontextually appropriate meaning appears to beactivated (Tabossi and Zardon, 1993).
BIA+ proposes to use such monolingual results to
formulate predictions for bilingual research based onthe assumption that syntactic and semantic effectsare language non-selective, just as word recognition
is language non-selective. For instance, syntacticconstraints will affect word recognition irrespectiveof the language of sentence context or target word,and syntactic lexical and phrasal categories may tosome extent be language independent. Thus, effectsof cross-linguistic syntactic priming between L1 and
L2 are expected to occur.
Thus, the BIA+ model proposes that linguistic
context, in particular syntactic and semantic context,may directly affect bilingual word activation via theword identi®cation system. In the next section, weargue that non-linguistic information is more likelyto affect the task/decision system. In fact, we willargue that word activation is not modulated by non-
linguistic context.
4.5 Non-linguistic context effects
In principle, non-linguistic context (such as the parti-
cipants' expectations on the basis of instruction ortask demands) could affect a language non-selectiveword recognition system in several ways. One option
is that both linguistic and non-linguistic context
information can modulate the relative activation ofitems in the target and non-target language after theinitial stages of lexical processing. For instance,context information might inhibit (i.e., reduce theactivation of ) lexical candidates or lemmas in theirrelevant language (cf. BIA model by Dijkstra et al.,1998(a),(b); IC model by Green, 1986, 1998) or
induce a ¯exible modulation of the relative activation
of lexical candidates in the two languages (Grosjean,1997). A second option is that non-linguistic contextinformation does not affect the activity in the identi-®cation system itself, but leads to an adaptation ofdecision criteria only. A third option is that adapta-tions in both activation levels and decision criteriaare possible (as is the case in BIA and IC models).
The BIA+ model proposes that (in contrast to
linguistic effects) non-linguistic context effects inreading can be accounted for only by the secondoption. Thus, effects that are explained by relativelylate effects of top-down inhibition in the BIA modelare accounted for by decision criteria adaptations inBIA+. So far, there seems to be little pertinentevidence in favor of top-down inhibition of active
lexical candidates on the basis of task demands or
participant strategies. In other words, it appears thatthe bilingual word identi®cation system is encapsu-lated relative to decision level factors. Thus, forbilingual word recognition we reject the conclusiondrawn by Gerard and Scarborough (1989, p. 314)that ``bilinguals can exercise a considerable degree ofcontrol over access to lexical information''.188 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150How can the hypotheses of top-down inhibition or
adaptation of decision criteria be contrasted? Theanswer depends in part on the speci®cation of eachview. Let us assume that top-down inhibition occursin a particular experimental situation if the suppres-sion of activation of items of one language leads to abetter overall performance. Suppression here means
that the activation of these items is reduced and that,
as a consequence, their in¯uence on other lexicalcandidates is minimized. We should then be able toobserve the effects of such top-down inhibition bycomparing two experimental situations that are assimilar as possible except that one of them is opti-mized if unwanted items are suppressed, while theother does not bene®t from (or is harmed by) such
suppression.
A few recent studies seem to allow such a com-
parison, both within- and between-experiments. Forinstance, in the homograph studies by Dijkstra et al.(2000(b), Experiments 2 and 3) discussed earlier,participants would have given the fastest RTs tohomographs and control items if they had suppresseditems belonging to the non-target language (the same
holds for Experiment 2 in Dijkstra et al., 1998(b)).
Such an optimization by the participants would haveled to RTs to homographs that were just as fast as tocontrols. Instead, strong inhibition effects wereobtained indicating that suppression of the non-target language candidates was not possible. (The``inhibition effects'' that were observed re¯ectcompetition of the two readings of the interlingual
homographs rather than the suppression of one of
them. Thus, they are not ``top-down'' inhibitioneffects as de®ned above.) Analogously, Dutchphonology was not relevant for the English lexicaldecision to be made in the experiments in Dijkstra etal. (1999). Nevertheless, it was activated and inducedinhibitory effects on the response. In other words,parallel bottom-up activation of lexical candidates
from both languages is so strong that suppressing it
seems practically impossible.
A similar argument is found in the English lexical
decision study by Dijkstra, De Bruijn, Schriefers andTen Brinke (2000(a)). This experiment consisted oftwo parts. In part 1 of this study, which includedonly English words and nonwords, the RTs ofDutch-English bilinguals to interlingual homographs
were just as fast as to English control items. In part 2,
purely Dutch (non-target language) items were intro-duced (requiring a ``no'' response) that led to clearinhibition effects for interlingual homographs relativeto controls. However, RTs to English control itemswere only marginally affected by the transition(581 ms to 592 ms, signi®cant at p < .05 only in theitem analysis), indicating little change in activationgoing from part 1 to part 2. The observed small effect
could be explained by a slight change in the decisionprocess, as a consequence of the extra caution neededto exclude purely Dutch words.
Indeed, a comparison of the control conditions
across experiments in Dijkstra et al. (1998(b)) and inDe Groot, Delmaar and Lupker (2000), strikingly
con®rms this analysis. The three experiments in the
study by Dijkstra et al. were conducted using differ-ent participants from one population and containedmostly the same test materials. Nevertheless, theexperiments showed strong and systematic effects oninterlingual homograph recognition of the inclusionof Dutch words (Experiment 2 vs. Experiment 1) andchanges in task demands (Experiments 1 and 2 vs.
Experiment 3). In contrast, the mean RTs to the
English control items across the three experimentswere affected much less by these changes. Similarly,De Groot et al. (2000) obtained very similar RTs forthe English control conditions in English lexicaldecision without (Experiment 2) and with Dutchwords (Experiment 3), and the same held for theDutch control conditions in Dutch lexical decision
without and with English words. Rather than
explaining the small differences between the controlconditions across the experiments of the two studiesin terms of relative language activation, it is moreelegant to explain them as small changes in thedecision process applied in the different experimentsor small variations in the participants' L2 pro®ciency.In sum, it does not seem to be possible to suppress
the activation of one reading of an interlingual
homograph even when that would undoubtedlyimprove performance.
However, one could argue that the alternative
reading of interlingual homographs is always comple-tely supported by input information. Perhaps thebottom-up support for these items is so strong that itoverrides any attempt at top-down inhibition. This is
not the case for neighbors of the target item, so
conceivably for neighborhood materials non-targetcandidates could be more easily suppressed.However, cross-experimental comparisons withrespect to neighborhood density suggest no suppres-sion either. Van Heuven et al. (1998) had Dutch-English participants of one population perform ablocked or a mixed Progressive Demasking task.
According to a relative language activation view,
adding words from the non-target language shouldinduce extra activation of the non-target language,which should affect especially the recognition ofitems in the weaker language (English for these bi-linguals). However, RTs in the two experimentscorrelated .99 and .98 for English and Dutch targetitems (Dijkstra and Van Heuven, 1998, Tables 6.1189 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150and 6.2), so the result patterns were very much alike.
The relative activation of the two languages was
apparently not affected by mode of list presentation,
because otherwise one would expect one of the twocorrelations to be much smaller (furthermore, regres-sion analyses of the relationship between RTs andEnglish or Dutch item frequency in the two experi-ments yielded nearly parallel lines).
Other evidence that items of the two languages are
always fully activated is found in a recent study by
Schulpen, Dijkstra and Schriefers (in preparation).
This study replicated and extended the three experi-ments from Dijkstra et al. (1998(b)) with Dutch-English high school students of 15 and 17 years ofage, students of psychology and Ph.D. students.Each experiment not only included interlingualhomographs and matched English controls of differ-ent frequency groups, but also a set of exclusively
English words that varied across a considerable
frequency range. As before, Experiment 1 consistedof English words only, Experiment 2 also incorpo-rated purely Dutch words that had to be rejected,and Experiment 3 contained English and Dutchwords that all had to be accepted. Figure 3 depictsregression analyses indicating how RTs to Englishitems of a considerable frequency range becamefaster in all three experiments when English fre-
quency increased. Just like in the earlier studies(Dijkstra et al., 1998(b); De Groot et al., 2000), theRTs for English target words presented in a list thatalso contained Dutch words (Experiment 2) weresomewhat slower than when presented withoutDutch words (Experiment 1), but the slope of the two
regression lines was statistically identical. Schulpen et
al. argue that this is evidence that the response toEnglish words is affected only by a different decisionprocess in Experiments 1 and 2. If task demands wereto affect the relative language activation in the identi-®cation system, one would expect an interactionbetween English frequency and Experiment (1 or 2)because suppression should differentially affect the
activation of lower and higher frequency items across
experiments.
To conclude, the available evidence indicates that
differences between these experiments, involving par-ticipants from the same population and the samestimulus materials, result from changes in decisionparameter settings related to task demands ratherthan from changes in the relative activation levels of
items of the two languages. This conclusion goes
against such models as the original BIA model, theIC model and the theoretical view of the languagemode. It is more compatible with the positionsexpressed by De Groot et al. (2000) and Dijkstra etal. (2000(a)), and will be taken into account duringthe future implementation of the task/decision levelin the BIA+ model.
4.6 Relationship between word identi®cation and task
demands
The BIA+ distinction between an identi®cation
system and a task/decision system is in line with theview that in performing a task (such as lexicaldecision) an early preconscious, automatic level of
processing may be followed by an attention-sensitive
level in which percepts are selected with reference tocontextual factors of various sorts and linked toparticular responses relevant to the task at hand(cf. Altenberg and Cairns, 1983, p. 187; Dupoux andMehler, 1992; Balota, Paul and Spieler, 1999).
The task schema speci®es the series of mental
processing steps to be taken or operations (the ``algo-
rithm'') to be carried out to perform the speci®c task
at hand (Green, 1986, 1998; Norman and Shallice,1986). The task schema is set up during the practiceset or retrieved from memory to perform the task.The decision mechanism is part of the task schema. Itcontinuously reads out the activation in the identi®-cation system. At the appropriate cognitive step inthe schema, it weighs different kinds of activationExperiment
English lex. dec.
with D–words
Generalized lex. dec.
English lex. dec.
without D–words1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400Reaction time (ms)
3000200010005003002001005030201053124
English frequency (log scale)
Figure 3. Regression lines re¯ecting the dependence of
lexical decision RTs to English words of a considerableEnglish frequency range on their frequency. These data
were collected for Dutch-English students of psychology in
visual lexical decision tasks including and excluding purelyDutch words, and a generalized Dutch-English lexical
decision task (Schulpen et al., in preparation). There were
no statistically signi®cant differences between the lines interms of their slopes.190 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150input from the identi®cation system relative to others
to arrive at a response.
The decision will often depend on lexical selection,
based on the crossing of an activation threshold for alexical candidate. For instance, in lexical decision theinput letter string activates orthographic, semanticand phonological codes, all of which could allow a
discrimination of word and nonword input. How-
ever, code use might be quite different in languagedecision, in which participants press one button if apresented item belongs to one language (e.g.,English) and another button if it belongs to anotherlanguage (e.g., Dutch). In language decision, onlycodes that facilitate the retrieval of languagemembership information (language tags) are useful
to arrive at a correct response.
Thus, different schemas underly different tasks,
and sometimes one task may be performed by differ-ent schemas. Apart from the general organization ofthe task schema, performance may further be ¯exiblein terms of the representations on which read-out isbased and with respect to the amount of evidencerequired in favor of particular lexical options at
different moments in time. For instance, as Grainger
and Jacobs (1996) have argued, the composition ofthe stimulus list (e.g., the types of nonwords) mayaffect these decision criteria (also see Lima andHuntsman, 1997; Lupker, Brown and Colombo,1997; Taylor and Lupker, 2001).
After the task schema is set up, dynamic adapta-
tions during the experiment usually concern a ®ne-
tuning of parameters. On the basis of the practice set,
recognition thresholds and temporal deadlines are setthat may be adapted during the experiment depend-ent on local stimulus list composition. For instance,the threshold on item identi®cation is context-sensitive and may be adapted after each trial; thetemporal deadline may be set depending on theamount of activation early in processing or the fre-
quency of the previous items in the list, etc.
Context-sensitive adaptations of decision para-
meter settings can take place during stimulus listpresentation without conscious intervention of theparticipant. For instance, the selection threshold forwords may be lowered if the nonwords in the list areeasy to reject and response speed can be increased atan acceptable cost in error rate. As another example,
in Dutch lexical decision the threshold for saying
``yes'' to Dutch words may be lowered when it turnsout that all English words present are low frequencyand only few errors are made. The decision mech-anism tries to optimize performance in terms of aninternally set optimality criterion involving speed andaccuracy (derived from the written, verbal and non-verbal instructions received from the experimenter).A structural re®guration of the task schema may
occur if the participant becomes aware of particularcorrelations between variables in the experiment. Forexample, Von Studnitz and Green (2002) haveproposed that a ``conjoint test'' may develop inlanguage-speci®c lexical decision if participantsrealize that both readings of interlingual homographs
could be used for responding when there are no
context words belonging exclusively to the non-targetlanguage. The conjoint test uses the simultaneouspresence of lexical activation in two languages tospeed up the response relative to one-languagecontrol items.
We further propose that the identi®cation and
task/decision systems, though interconnected, are
partially independent. The identi®cation system pro-
vides continuous output to the task/decision system,which is likely to use that output for response selec-tion. Nevertheless, the task/decision system to someextent functions on its own. First, a word presentedto the identi®cation system may be recognized sometime before a decision can be made, because certaininformation necessary to perform the task (e.g.,
language information in language decision) is not yet
available or because the participant's strategy is towait for additional information. Second, the oppositesituation can also arise, for instance, in lexical deci-sion. A participant may respond before lexical identi-®cation has taken place or if only limited informationis available (e.g., orthographic but no semantic orphonological information). Some approaches have
called this type of strategy ``sophisticated guessing''
because a decision may be made on essentially toolittle information to ensure a correct response in allcases. In the Multiple Read Out model (MROM) forlexical decision by Grainger and Jacobs (1996), thesum or sigma criterion for responding is part of asimilar mechanism. Thus, the decision mechanismuses the activation within the identi®cation system as
a basis for decision, but it need not await the settling
of the activation process, and it could, if it is set thatway, also use other sources of information (e.g.,guessing on the basis of stimulus list composition orparticipant expectancies).
We assume that the two systems have their own
criteria for action triggering (i.e., lexical selection andresponse selection/execution). The identi®cation
system can be said to recognize a word (i.e., selects a
single lexical candidate with enough certainty) whenthe system reaches a stable state. The task/decisionsystem triggers a response if its own criteria areful®lled, some of which pertain to lexical activation,while others refer to optimization criteria. Thedecision mechanism estimates the chances of makingan error if a response were initiated at a particular191 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150moment in time. This does not necessarily concern
only the chance of giving a wrong response (e.g., inlexical decision), but can also pertain to the momentin time one starts speaking during word naming. Forinstance, starting to speak before the complete articu-latory representation is available might interrupt thenaming response. The task/decision mechanism must
dynamically evaluate the perceived activation in
different parts of the identi®cation system and bind itto a particular response in such a way that optimalperformance is likely to arise.
Because participants can only control the
operation of the task/decision mechanism, they haveonly a speci®c type of control over their performance.After a task schema is set up, particular to the
experimental situation, performance can only be
adapted by resorting to strategies involving selectiveread-out, dynamic adjustment of identi®cationcriteria, and so on, but not by adapting the activationlevel of individual items or languages. For instance,Van Heuven et al. (1998) observed that Dutch/English high-pro®ciency participants seemed tomodulate the relative contribution of English neigh-
bors to Dutch word identi®cation times in the course
of the blocked progressive demasking experiment.Cross-linguistic effects changed from clear inhibitionearly in the experiment to much smaller effects later.According to the present model, both English andDutch lexical candidates were always activated, butparticipants adapted their decision criteria to opti-mize their performance.
4.7 Stimulus-response binding in lexical decision
The task/decision system speci®es how activated and
selected representations in the identi®cation systemare bound to possible responses. For instance, inword naming the selected phonological and articula-tory representations are used as a basis for response.
In lexical decision, a ``yes'' response is triggered by
the presence of suf®cient lexical activation at aparticular moment in time, while a ``no'' response isgiven if lexical activation is low when a temporaldeadline is reached or when a mismatch is detectedbetween the most activated lexical candidate and theinput string at some critical evaluation moment.Here the schema might opt to use information from
different sources in parallel, but presently available
evidence suggests that orthographic representationsplay a major role (Pexman and Lupker, 2001). Ingeneralized lexical decision, the decision mechanismis slightly more complex because the production ruleis to ``respond `yes' if the input is a word in eitherL1 or L2''. For language decision, responses (``pressthe English or Dutch response button'') are assumedto be bound to language tag representations, con-
nected to language speci®c form representations orlemmas.
In some experimental paradigms, stimulus-
response binding might already be partially preparedat an early stage. That could happen, for instance, inlanguage decision, where the language tag for all
Dutch words could be bound to the ``left'' response
and the tag for English words to the ``right'' responseeven before the experiment. This would explain whythe RTs in that task are not so much slower than inlexical decision. (An interesting possibility is that``global activation'' effects arise because nonwords orwords have many neighbors that are connected to thesame response.)
The view of a dynamic adaptation of stimulus-
response bindings and decision criteria may help toexplain some remarkable lexical decision results inthe literature, for instance, the null-results observedfor interlingual homographs in De Moor (1998),Dijkstra et al. (1998(b), 2000(a)) and De Groot et al.(2000), or the results obtained by Dijkstra et al.(2000(a)) in the ®rst and second part of their study
(see section 4.5 above). Suppose that bilingual
participants in these English lexical decision experi-ments try to follow their task instruction to the letterand set up a task schema in which they bind the``yes'' response strongly to all English words, usingthe language tag for this purpose. They also under-stand in a more abstract way that other words andnonwords must receive a ``no'' response. Now
suppose that an interlingual homograph is presented.
As long as there is no strong binding of the Dutchreading of the homograph to the ``no'' response,there will be no strong response competition (eventhough both readings of the homograph are acti-vated). This will lead to the absence of RT differencesbetween homographs and one-language controlwords. As soon as a Dutch word is presented in the
stimulus list (or practice list), however, the response
binding of Dutch stimuli to the ``no'' response will bestrengthened considerably, leading to much strongerresponse competition effects and inhibition for theinterlingual homographs. This is in correspondencewith the observed results. Furthermore, in the studyby Dijkstra et al. (2000(a)), English control wordswere not affected by the transition from the ®rst part
of the experiment to the second because they were
bound to ``yes'' only. Nonwords were not affected bythis change either, because they were bound to the``no'' response in a completely different way, namelyin terms of the absence of enough lexical evidence ata temporal deadline.
So far this account is based upon decision level
effects and it does not account for cross-linguistic192 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150effects found in comparable studies. As noted in
section 4.1, Dijkstra et al. (1999) did observe signi®-cant RT-differences to interlingual homographs (andcognates) and controls for Dutch-English bilingualswho performed an English lexical decision task. Inthe BIA+ model, such effects originate from inter-actions in the mental lexicon before the response
comes about. Note that until the target word is
identi®ed and its language tag retrieved forresponding, cross-linguistic interactions can arisewithin the mental lexicon. In language speci®c lexicaldecision (e.g., English), these effects may not be veryvisible, because the non-target language (e.g., Dutch)is not directly relevant to the response. However,when the stimulus list is mixed and the other-
language words are connected to a ``no'' response,
this response binding serves as a magnifying glassand strong inhibition effects become visible.
In this view, there is an important difference in the
nature of the observed relative frequency effects andthe cross-linguistic code similarity effects (Dijkstraet al., 1998(b), 1999). Word frequency is a deter-minant of the speed with which lexical information
can be retrieved, whereas the size of code similarity
effects depends, for instance, on the time intervalbetween stimulus presentation and response selectionduring which interactions within the lexicon can takeplace.
We conclude that the reviewed lexical decision
studies were affected by intra-lexical effects(explaining, for instance, effects of cross-linguistic
similarity and relative frequency) as well as extra-
lexical effects at the task/decision level (explaining,for instance, the change of effects from part 1 to part2 in the Dijkstra et al., 2000, study). Implementingstimulus-response binding effects in the BIA+ modelwill constitute a challenging ®rst step in the directionof implementing task schemas.
4.8 Stimulus-response binding in language switching
Several studies have investigated effects of task and
language switching (Grainger and Beauvillain, 1987;Von Studnitz and Green, 1997; Meuter and Allport,1999; Thomas and Allport, 2000), providing impor-tant information about the relationship betweenidenti®cation and task /decision system. Green (1998)
proposed two possible loci of language switch costs
in bilingual processing, namely within the lexico-semantic system and at the task schema level (Green,1998, p. 73). In the BIA model (Dijkstra and VanHeuven, 1998) these two loci were confoundedbecause the language nodes had both representa-tional and functional signi®cance. Research by VonStudnitz and Green (1997) and by Thomas andAllport (2000) indicates that the most important
source of switch costs in most processing tasksprobably does not lie within the lexicon.
The BIA+ model attempts to account for cross-
trial ®ndings in stimulus lists by distinguishing threecomponents to language switching effects: the taskand its associated response bindings (e.g., ``if word,
press `yes' button''), the actual response (e.g., ``yes''
or ``no''; naming response), and item language (e.g.,English or Dutch). Thus, BIA+ does not assume thatlexical decision requires the activation and competi-tion of more than one task schema, as proposed byThomas and Allport, 2000). In generalized lexicaldecision, the actual response (``yes'') does not changewhen the language of the next word changes relative
to a previous word. This might suggest a lexical locus
of the language switching effect in this task, butdecision level adaptations are also possible, forinstance, (1) between-trial adaptations of the relativerecognition threshold for English and Dutch words;(2) in terms of the attention switch in verifying theconnection between, e.g., an English word to the``yes'' response to verifying that between the follow-
ing Dutch word and the ``yes'' response. Further-
more, in the standard language speci®c lexicaldecision task involving words from two languages(e.g., Dijkstra et al., 1998(b)), a language switchimplies a change in language and actual response(e.g., from ``yes'' to ``no''), but not in responsebinding. In contrast, in the alternate runs variant oflanguage speci®c lexical decision, a switch between
trials implies a change in all three factors. Possibly,
the decision system is sensitive to the presence ofmatches and mismatches between the three types offactors (cf. the frequent errors in the go/no-go taskby Dijkstra et al., 2000(b), where the detection of aword rather than its language information led to aresponse, see section 2.5 above).
5 Generalizability of the BIA+ model
The BIA+ model is a model for bilingual visual word
recognition. However, we think that it can begeneralized to other domains in a number of respects.For instance, we assume that the distinction betweenword retrieval and task/decision system will also bevalid for bilingual auditory word recognition and
bilingual word production (cf. Green, 1998). Further-
more, the available evidence from these two otherdomains suggests that there may be similarities interms of lexical access mechanisms as well. For lackof space, we refer the reader to Kroll and Dijkstra(2002) for a discussion of the similarities betweenbilingual language production and bilingual visualword recognition in terms of the BIA model. Here we193 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150will compare bilingual visual and auditory word
recognition in some detail.
Just like in the visual domain, the presentation of
a spoken word is assumed to lead to the activation ofa number of lexical candidates (for overviews seeFrauenfelder, 1996; Dijkstra, in press). One of theavailable models of spoken word recognition, the
TRACE model (McClelland and Elman, 1986),
incorporates a theoretical view of auditory wordrecognition that is directly analogous to that of itsvisual counterpart, the Interactive Activation model(also see Grosjean, 1997, for BIMOLA, a bilingualmodel for auditory word recognition). However, inauditory models the nature of the set of lexicalcompetitors is generally different from that in the
visual modality. In spoken word recognition, it is the
initial part of a word that leads to the activation of aset of matching lexical candidates. The activatedcollection of possible competing word candidates isoften called the (word-initial) cohort . This collection
of possible words is assumed to depend on thephonemes it consists of ( just like the letters in visualword recognition), or perhaps on a matrix of acti-
vated phonetic/phonological features. Later mis-
matching information may lead to the exclusion ofword candidates (and according to some models latermatching information may activate possible candi-dates at a delay). Somewhere in the signal (possiblybefore the end of the input has been reached), enoughinformation is available to uniquely identify thepresented stimulus word and reject other possible
word candidates with (enough) certainty.
Given the similarity between visual and auditory
word recognition in terms of the parallel activationof lexical competitors, it is reasonable to assume thatthere is language non-selective access in the auditorymodality as well. However, the auditory signal con-tains language-speci®c sublexical cues that have nodirect counterpart in the visual modality when words
are read from two languages with the same script.
For instance, there are differences in phonemic reper-toires across languages that can potentially be usedto reduce the cohort set already early during bilingualauditory word recognition.
Surprisingly enough, most of the few studies that
have been done indicate that auditory lexical access islanguage non-selective in nature, even though partici-
pants are at the same time sensitive to sublexical cues
(Li, 1996; Marian and Spivey, 1999; Schulpen,Dijkstra, Schriefers and Hasper, submitted; but seePallier, Colome Âand Sebastia Ân-Galle Ás, 2001, for a
different view). For instance, in three experiments,Schulpen et al. (submitted) investigated how inter-lingual homophones are recognized during bilingualspoken word recognition. In a gating study, wordidenti®cation and language membership decisions by
Dutch-English bilinguals were found to be slower forinterlingual homophones than for one-languagecontrol items. At the same time, participants weresensitive to subphonemic cues when they assessed thelanguage a word belonged to. These ®ndings suggestthat auditory lexical access is language non-selective
while sensitive to language speci®c characteristics of
the input. Two additional on-line experiments testedthis view using a cross-modal priming paradigm.Visual targets included interlingual homophones andone-language control items. Auditory distractorsdiffered in their amount of form overlap with thevisual targets. Visual lexical decisions were fastest forone-language controls preceded by their auditory
equivalents (e.g., the English auditory prime /frame/
followed by the related visual target word FRAME).Responses to interlingual homophones accompaniedby their English or Dutch distractor version (e.g., thevisually presented English target word LEAF pre-ceded by the auditory English prime /leaf/ or theDutch prime /lief/, meaning ``dear'') were also fasterthan all unrelated conditions. However, they were
slower than the related one-language control con-
ditions, providing evidence for on-line competition oftheir two readings. Different effects of English andDutch distractors on homophone processing inExperiment 3 suggest that participants used sub-lexical cues to differentiate the two readings of ahomophone after language non-selective access.
Apparently, a slight mismatch is not suf®cient to
exclude word candidates from another language from
the cohort (Marian and Spivey, 1999; Schulpen et al.,submitted). Future studies will have to determinehow much mismatching information is necessary toinduce language-selective access results and how itaffects the time-course of activation of L1 and L2candidates. One would expect that sublexical andother cross-linguistic cues (e.g., in terms of word
stress and tonal information) must somehow be able
to help to reduce the number of possible competitorsfrom another language under some circumstances.
In sum, in spite of considerable differences in
terms of representations and processes, bilingualvisual and auditory word recognition both appear toentail a language non-selective access procedureinvolving an initial activation of word candidates
from different languages. Even though modality spe-
ci®c processing characteristics are to be expected, sofar most evidence seems to be compatible with theBIA+ framework.
6 Conclusion
In this paper we have presented a new theoretical194 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150framework for bilingual word recognition, called the
BIA+ model, which consists of an identi®cationsystem that provides information about activatedrepresentations from different languages to a decisionand response selection mechanism operating as partof a task schema. Although related to the BIA modeland the IC model, the BIA+ model is more explicit
than other models with respect to the time-course of
the bilingual word identi®cation process, the inter-actions between different types of representations(orthographic, phonological, semantic) and the repre-sentation of interlingual homographs and languagemembership tags. Furthermore, the model makes adistinction between the effects of linguistic and non-linguistic context on performance. Linguistic context
effects (e.g., sentence context) can directly affect the
activity in the word identi®cation system, while non-linguistic context effects (e.g., participant strategies)can only affect the task/decision system. These dis-tinctions lead to many testable model predictions,just like the model's detailed account on stimulus-response binding in lexical decision and in languageswitching experiments.
Evidence supporting the distinction between the
word identi®cation and the task/decision system wasderived in part from a comparison of closely relatedvariants of the lexical decision task. A comparison ofthe result patterns of language-speci®c and general-ized task variants including stimuli from one or twolanguages was helpful in demonstrating that taskdemands can systematically modify the output
pattern of the underlying word identi®cation system.
Evidence from other techniques, such as progressivedemasking, language decision and word naming (andfrom ``classical'' paradigms such as recognition andrecall in pure and mixed lists) is compatible withthese conclusions. Thus, although different types oftasks necessarily require different ways of arriving ata response, they all appear to re¯ect a common
underlying pattern of activation in the word identi®-
cation system.
At present, the BIA+ model is only implemented
with respect to the orthographic representations inthe identi®cation system (allowing the simulations insections 2.3, 2.4, and 2.6). This is the part the modelshares with the BIA model. An important differencebetween the BIA model and the BIA+ model is that
the latter model rejects the powerful asymmetic top-
down inhibition mechanism from language nodes toword nodes that has accounted for shifts in resultpatterns within and between experiments. The task/decision component is proposed as a replacementmechanism that should perform the same functions.Additional empirical data must be collected to testthe assumption of BIA+ that the task/decisionsystem cannot affect relative language activation in
the identi®cation system. Filling many more of theremaining gaps in our knowledge about bilinguallexical processing is necessary before a completeimplementation of the BIA+ or of any other bilingualword recognition model can be built.
References
Altarriba, J., Kroll, J. F., Sholl, A. & Rayner, K. (1996).
The in¯uence of lexical and conceptual constraints onreading mixed-language sentences: Evidence from eye
®xations and naming times. Memory & Cognition , 24,
477±492.
Altenberg, E. P. & Cairns, H. S. (1983). The effects of
phonotactic constraints on lexical processing in bi-
lingual and monolingual subjects. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior , 22, 174±188.
Andrews, S. (1989). Frequency and neighborhood effects
on lexical access: Activation or search? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory andCognition , 15, 802±814.
Balota, D. A., Paul, S. T. & Spieler, D. H. (1999). Atten-
tional control of lexical processing pathways duringword recognition and reading. In S. Garrod & M.
Pickering (eds.), Language processing , pp. 15±57.
Hove: Psychology Press.
Bijeljac-Babic, R., Biardeau, A. & Grainger, J. (1997).
Masked orthographic priming in bilingual word
recognition. Memory & Cognition , 25, 447±457.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J. T. & Besner, D.
(1977). Access to the internal lexicon. In S. Dornic
(ed.), Attention and performance VI , pp. 535±555. New
York: Academic Press.
Cristoffanini, P., Kirshner, K. & Milech, D. (1986). Bi-
lingual lexical representation: The status of Spanish-
English cognates. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology , 38A, 367±393.
De Groot, A. M. B., Delmaar, P. & Lupker, S. J. (2000).
The processing of interlexical homographs in a bi-lingual and a monolingual task: Support for non-selective access to bilingual memory. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology , 53, 397±428.
De Moor, W. (1998). Visuele woordherkenning bij tweeta-
lige personen [Visual word recognition in bilinguals].
Master thesis, University of Ghent.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (1998). From tag to task: Coming to
grips with bilingual control issues. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition , 1, 51±66.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (in press). Word recognition and lexical
access II: Connectionist approaches. In D. A. Cruse,
F. Hundsnurscher, M. Job & P. R. Lutzeier (eds.),
Lexikologie±Lexicology . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
(Article 265.)
Dijkstra, A. (Ton), De Bruijn, E., Schriefers, H. J. & Ten
Brinke, S. (2000(a)). More on interlingual homograph
recognition: Language intermixing versus explicitnessof instruction. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition ,
3, 69±78.195 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150Dijkstra, A. (Ton), Grainger, J. & Van Heuven, W. J. B.
(1999). Recognition of cognates and interlingualhomographs: The neglected role of phonology. Journal
of Memory and Language , 41, 496±518.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Kempen, G. (1984). Taal in uitvoering
[Language in progress]. Groningen: Wolters-
Noordhoff.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton), Timmermans, M. & Schriefers, H.
(2000(b)). Cross-language effects on bilingual homo-graph recognition. Journal of Memory and Language ,
42, 445±464.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Van Heuven, W. J. B. (1998). The
BIA model and bilingual word recognition. In J.
Grainger & A. M. Jacobs (eds.), Localist connectionist
approaches to human cognition , pp. 189±225. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton), Van Heuven, W. J. B. & Grainger, J.
(1998(a)). Simulating competitor effects with theBilingual Interactive Activation Model. Psychologica
Belgica , 38, 177±196.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton), Van Jaarsveld, H. & Ten Brinke, S.
(1998(b)). Interlingual homograph recognition: Effectsof task demands and language intermixing. Bilingual-
ism: Language and Cognition , 1, 51±66.
Dupoux, E. & Mehler, J. (1992). Unifying awareness and
on-line studies of speech: A tentative framework. In
J. Alegria, D. Holender, J. Junca de Morais & M.
Radeau (eds.), Analytic approaches to human cogni-
tion, pp. 59±75. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Pub-
lishers.
Duffy, S., Morris, R. & Rayner, K. (1988). Lexical
ambiguity and ®xation times in reading. Journal of
Memory and Language , 27, 429±446.
Elston-Gu Èttler, K. & Williams, J. N. (submitted). Bilingual
ambiguities: Sentence context effects on processinginterlingual homographs and translated L1 homo-
graphs in the L2.
Ferrand, L. & Grainger, J. (1993). The time-course of
orthographic and phonological code activation in the
early phases of visual word recognition. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society , 31, 119±122.
Font, N. (2001). Ro Ãle de la langue dans l'acce Ás au lexique
chez les bilingues: In¯uence de la proximite Âortho-
graphique et se Âmantique interlangue sur la reconnais-
sance visuelle de mots. Ph.D. thesis, Universite ÂPaul
Valery, Montpellier.
Frauenfelder, U. (1996). Computational models of spoken
word recognition. In A. Dijkstra & K. De Smedt(eds.), Computational psycholinguistics: AI and con-
nectionist models of human language processing , pp.
114±138. London: Taylor & Francis.
Gerard, L. D. & Scarborough, D. L. (1989). Language-
speci®c lexical access of homographs by bilinguals.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,Memory and Cognition , 15, 305±313.
Grainger, J. & Beauvillain, C. (1987). Language blocking
and lexical access in bilinguals. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology , 39A, 295±319.
Grainger, J. & Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (1992). On the represen-
tation and use of language information in bilinguals.In R. J. Harris (ed.), Cognitive processing in bilinguals ,
pp. 207±220. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Grainger, J. & Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (1996). Visual word
recognition. In A. (Ton) Dijkstra & K. De Smedt
(eds.), Computational psycholinguistics: AI and con-
nectionist models of human language processing , pp.
139±165. London: Taylor & Francis.
Grainger, J. & Jacobs, A. M. (1996). Orthographic pro-
cessing in visual word recognition: A multiple read-outmodel. Psychological Review , 103, 518±565.
Grainger, J. & O'Regan, J. K. (1992). A psychophysical
investigation of language priming effects in twoEnglish-French bilinguals. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology , 4, 323±339.
Grainger, J., O'Regan, J. K., Jacobs, A.M. & Segui, J.
(1989). On the role of competing word units in visual
word recognition: The neighborhood frequency effect.
Perception & Psychophysics , 45, 189±195.
Grainger, J. & Segui, J. (1990). Neighborhood frequency
effects in visual word recognition: A comparison of
lexical decision and masked identi®cation latencies.
Perception & Psychophysics , 47, 191±198.
Green, D. W. (1986). Control, activation, and resource: A
framework and a model for the control of speech in
bilinguals. Brain & Language , 27, 210±223.
Green, D. W. (1998). Mental control of the bilingual
lexico-semantic system. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition , 1, 67±81.
Grosjean, F. (1997). Processing mixed language: Issues,
®ndings and models. In A. M. B. De Groot & J. F.
Kroll (eds.), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic
perspectives , pp. 225±254. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Jared, D. & Kroll, J. F. (2001). Do bilinguals activate
phonological representations in one or both of theirlanguages when naming words? Journal of Memory
and Language , 44, 2±31.
Kroll, J. F. & Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (2002). The bilingual
lexicon. In R. Kaplan (ed.), Handbook of applied
linguistics , pp. 301±321. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Lalor, E. & Kirsner, K. (2000). Cross-lingual transfer
effects between English and Italian cognates and
noncognates. International Journal of Bilingualism ,4 ,
385±398.
Lemho Èfer, K. & Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (submitted). Recog-
nizing cognates and interlingual homographs: Effects
of code similarity in generalized lexical decision.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A. & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 21, 1±38.
Li, P. (1996). Spoken word recognition of code-switched
words by Chinese-English bilinguals. Journal of
Memory and Language , 35, 757±774.
Lima, S. D. & Huntsman, L. A. (1997). Sequential depen-
dencies in the lexical decision task. Psychological
Research , 60, 264±269.
Lucas, M. (1999). Context effects in lexical access: A meta-
analysis. Memory and Cognition , 27, 385±398.
Lupker, S. J., Brown, P. & Colombo, L. (1997). Strategic196 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150control in a naming task: Changing routes or changing
deadlines? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition , 23, 570±590.
Marian, V. & Spivey, M. (1999). Activation of Russian and
English cohorts during bilingual spoken word recogni-tion. In M. Hahn & S. C. Stoness (eds.), Proceedings of
the Twenty-®rst Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society , pp. 349±354. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Mathey, S. & Zagar, D. (2000). The neighborhood distri-
bution effect in visual word recognition: Words with
single and twin neighbors. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance , 26,
184±205.
McClelland, J. L. & Elman, J. (1986). Interactive processes
in speech perception: The TRACE model. In J. L.
McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart and the PDP Research
Group (eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Explor-
ations in the microstructure of cognition (vol. II), pp.
58±121. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McClelland, J. L. & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An inter-
active activation model of context effects in letterperception, Part 1: An account of basic ®ndings.
Psychological Review , 88, 375±405.
McCormack, P. D. (1977). Bilingual linguistic memory:
The independence-interdependence issue revisited. In
P. A. Hornby (ed.), Bilingualism: Psychological, social,
and educational implications , pp. 57±65. New York:
Academic Press.
Meuter, R. F. I. & Allport, A. (1999). Bilingual language
switching in naming: Asymmetrical costs of languageselection. Journal of Memory and Language , 40,
25±40.
Norman, D. A. & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action:
Willed and automatic control of behaviour. In R. J.Davidson, G. E. Schwartz & D. Shapiro (eds.),
Consciousness & self-regulation (vol. 4), pp. 1±18. New
York: Plenum Press.
Pallier, Ch., Colome Â, A. & Sebastia Ân-Galle Ás, N. (2001). The
in¯uence of native-language phonology on lexical
access: Exemplar-based versus abstract lexical entries.Psychological Science , 12, 445±449.
Pecher, D. (2001). Perception is a two-way junction: Feed-
back semantics in word recognition. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review , 8, 545±551.
Pexman, P. M. & Lupker, S. J. (2001). Ambiguity and
visual word recognition: Can feedback explain both
homophone and polysemy effects? Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology , 53, 323±334.
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J., Seidenberg, M. S. & Patter-
son, K. (1996). Understanding normal and impairedword reading: Computational principles in quasi-
regular domains. Psychological Review , 103, 56±115.
Raab, D. H. (1962). Statistical facilitation of simple re-
action time. Transactions of the New York Academy of
Sciences , 24, 574±590.
Reimer, J. F., Brown, J. S. & Lorsbach, T. C. (2001).
Orthographically mediated inhibition effects: Evidenceof activational feedback during visual word recogni-
tion. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 8, 102±110.SaÂnchez-Casas, R., Davis, C. W. & Garcã Âa-Albea, J. E.
(1992). Bilingual lexical processing: Exploring thecognate/non-cognate distinction. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology , 4, 311±322.
Schulpen, B., Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Schriefers, H. J. (in
preparation). A cross-sectional study on the develop-
ment of automatization and cognitive control in
Dutch-English bilinguals, part 1. [working title]
Schulpen, B., Dijkstra, A. (Ton), Schriefers, H. J. &
Hasper, M. (submitted). Recognition of interlingual
homophones in bilingual auditory word recognition.
Snodgrass, J. G. & Mintzer, M. (1993). Neighborhood
effects in visual word recognition: Facilitatory or
inhibitory? Memory & Cognition , 21, 247±266.
Swinney, D. A. (1979). Lexical access during sentence
comprehension: Reconsiderations of context effects.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour , 18,
645±659.
Tabossi, P. & Zardon, F. (1993). Processing ambiguous
words in context. Journal of Memory and Language ,
32, 359±372.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Leiman, J. M. & Seidenberg, M. S.
(1979). Evidence for multiple stages in the processing
of ambiguous words in syntactic context. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour , 18, 427±441.
Taylor, T. E. & Lupker, S. J. (2001). Sequential effects in
naming: A time-criterion account. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition ,
27, 117±138.
Thomas, M. S. C. & Allport, A. (2000). Language
switching costs in bilingual visual word recognition.Journal of Memory and Language , 43, 44±66.
Van Hell, J. G. & Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (in press). Foreign
language knowledge can in¯uence native language
performance in exclusively native contexts. Psycho-
nomic Bulletin & Review .
Van Heste, T. (1999). Visuele woordherkenning bij
tweetaligen [Visual word recognition in bilinguals].Master thesis, University of Leuven.
Van Heuven, W. J. B. (2000). Visual word recognition in
monolingual and bilingual readers: Experiments andcomputational modeling. Ph.D. Thesis, University ofNijmegen. (NICI Technical Report 20±01.)
Van Heuven, W. J. B., Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Grainger, J.
(1998). Orthographic neighborhood effects in bilingualword recognition. Journal of Memory and Language ,
39, 458±483.
Van Heuven, W. J. B., Dijkstra, A. (Ton), Grainger, J. &
Schriefers, H. (2001). Shared neighborhood effects in
masked orthographic priming. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review , 8, 96±101.
Von Studnitz, R. E. & Green, D. W. (1997). Lexical
decision and language switching. International Journal
of Bilingualism , 1, 3±24.
Von Studnitz, R. E. & Green, D. W. (2002). Interlingual
homograph interference in German-English bilinguals:
Its modulation and locus of control. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition , 5, 1±23.
Received August 30, 2001 Revision accepted July 12, 2002197 Bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150PEER COMMENTARIES
On the temporal delay
assumption and the impact ofnon-linguistic context effectsMARC BRYSBAERT
Royal Holloway, University of London,
Department of Psychology, Egham TW20 0EX, UK.
E-mail: marc.brysbaert@rhul.ac.uk
ILSE VAN WIJNENDAELE
Universiteit Leuven
WOUTER DUYCK
Universiteit Gent
It is not easy to comment on Dijkstra and Van Heuven's
model because there are many more aspects we agree with
than aspects we feel uncomfortable about. Indeed, the BIAmodel has played an enormous role in showing us how
bilingual visual word recognition can be achieved without
recurrence to the intuitively appealing ± but wrong ± ideasof separate, language-speci®c lexicons and language-selective access. As in many other research areas, a working
computational model has been much more in¯uential in
convincing critical readers (and researchers) than any seriesof empirical ®ndings. The BIA+ model inherits this
strength and, hopefully, in the coming years will be imple-
mented in enough detail to exceed its predecessor. In therest of this comment, we would like to put a cautionary
note behind the temporal delay assumption introduced in
the target article and provide some additional corrobor-ating evidence for the lack of non-linguistic effects on early
processes in the identi®cation system.
The ``temporal delay assumption'' claims that L2
phonological and semantic codes are delayed in activationrelative to L1 codes. This seems to imply that the delay will
be substantial and constant for all types of words (only
depending on the pro®ciency of the bilingual). With respectto the orthography-phonology conversion, we have quite
strong evidence that this is not the case. If the activation of
phonology in L2 were rather slow (and/or weak), then onewould expect less impact of phonology in second language
processing than in ®rst language processing. Probably the
best way to study the importance of phonological coding invisual word recognition is to make use of the maskedpriming paradigm. In this paradigm, a target word (e.g.,
``side'') is preceded by a tachistoscopically presented homo-
phonic non-word prime that sounds the same (e.g., ``syed'')or by a graphemic control prime that shares the same
number of letters but does not sound the same (e.g.,
``soed''). Evidence of phonological encoding is obtainedwhen target word processing is better after the homophonic
prime than after the graphemic control prime. Such a
homophonic priming effect has been reported in manylanguages including English, Dutch and French (see
Brysbaert, 2001 for a review).
In a series of experiments using Dutch and French
target words, we showed that the magnitude of the homo-phonic priming effect was equally large in L2 as in L1 (Van
Dyck and Van de Poel, 1999; Brysbaert, Van Wijnendaele
and Brysbaert, 2002; Brysbaert, in press), suggesting thatthe activation of phonological information from a visually
presented word is equally strong in both languages. So, theFrench word ``faim'' [hunger] had more chances of being
recognised after the homophonic prime ``fain'' than after
the graphemic control prime ``faic'', both for French-Dutchbilinguals and for Dutch-French bilinguals. The same effect
was found with Dutch target words like ``®jn'' [®ne]
preceded by the primes ``fein'' and ``foun''. These studiesmade use of bilinguals with a clear dominance of the ®rstlanguage (i.e., non-balanced bilinguals).
Apart from the above empirical ®ndings, there are also
theoretical reasons why the activation of L2 phonologyneed not always trail behind the L1 activation. When two
languages share the same alphabet, they are also likely to
have many similar letter-sound correspondences, in par-ticular for the consonants. For instance, the letters ``b'', ``c''
and ``d'' stand for very much the same sounds in Dutch and
French, and there are no reasons to believe why L2 proces-sing would not make use of these already existing, com-
patible L1 conversions. Furthermore, a number of letter
signs (or letter combinations) may be unique to L2 and ifthese are encountered frequently enough, their cumulativefrequency may outnumber the cumulative frequency of less
common L1 conversions. Again, any learning-based system
would predict that these L2 conversions are completedfaster than the less frequent L1 conversions (unless both are
at ceiling level, in which case conversion times will be the
same). Finally, there are the interesting instances where theL2 letter-sound correspondences are incompatible with the
existing L1 letter-sound correspondences. For instance, the
grapheme ``ee'' is pronounced /i:/ in English (as in ``meet'')but /e:/ in Dutch (as in ``leed'' [sorrow]). Depending on themodel of grapheme-phoneme conversions, one has to
predict that such L2 conversions either do not happen (if
the conversions are rule-based) or start to interfere with theoriginal L1 conversions (as in connectionist-type learning
models; see Van Wijnendaele and Brysbaert, 2002 for a
detailed discussion). In the latter case, L2 pro®ciency willnot only have implications for the processing of L2 but also
for the processing of words in the mother tongue (Brys-
baert, in press). Again, the end result is not simply a delayof L2 codes relative to L1 codes, but interactions between
both types of codes that are much more dynamic than
implied by the ``temporal delay assumption''.
Very much the same story could probably be told about
the activation of semantics from lexical orthography and
phonology. For those words that have exactly the same,
well-de®ned meaning in L1 and L2, it is probably relativelyeasy to activate the existing patterns of semantic features
from the new word forms. A typical class of such words areBilingualism: Language and Cognition 5 (3), 2002, 199±201 #2002 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902213012 199http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150the number words, which have exactly the same meaning in
different languages. Tzelgov, Yehene, Kotler, and Alon(2000) showed that arbitrary symbols representing magni-
tudes after a short learning phase evoke the same semantic
effects as the original Arabic digits. For instance, whendigit pairs are shown in two fonts with different physical
magnitudes, participants ®nd it more dif®cult to indicate
that 8 is the smaller symbol in the pair ``
2± 8'' than that 8 is
the larger symbol in the pair ``2 ± 8''. This effect is referred
to as the Stroop-like size congruity effect. Tzelgov et al.
observed that after a short training session the size con-
gruity effect can be obtained with any pair of arbitrarysymbols that have been introduced as ``alternative digits''.
Duyck and Brysbaert (in preparation) wondered whether a
similar effect would occur in number translation. First,they showed that bilinguals need less time to translate small
verbal numerals (e.g. ``two'') than large numerals (``eight''),
as could be expected on the basis of the ®nding that largenumbers need more time to activate their semantic repre-sentation than small numbers (Brysbaert, 1995). Then, they
trained a group of participants for half an hour on
unknown, so-called ``Estonian number words'' and hadthem translate these words. Exactly the same number-
magnitude effect was obtained as in the original study
(which involved two well-known languages), stronglysuggesting that the translation of the new Estonian words
was semantically mediated as well. So, the activation of
semantics from L2 words need not take longer than theactivation from L1 words, provided that the meanings of
both classes of words are the same and clearly speci®ed.
This will be particularly true for those words that inaddition to full semantic overlap, also share form proper-ties (i.e., cognates). Less rapid activation of semantics can
be expected for L2 words that cannot pro®t from existing
L1 word-meaning mappings (because they do not haveliteral translations) or that contradict the existing L1 map-
pings (as could be the case for homographs). Again, most
learning algorithms would predict that the introduction ofinconsistencies in the mappings due to the learning of a
new language not only has implications for the speed of the
L2 conversions, but is also likely to affect the existing L1conversions.
The above paragraphs remind us that a verbal descrip-
tion of a computational model is not the same as a fully
implemented and running model. Therefore, we are eagerto see the future implementations of the BIA+ model. Our
hunch is that the temporal delay assumption will be much
more dif®cult to implement than the scenario we haveoutline above. In the remainder, we would like to ®nish on
a more positive note, showing that the orthography-
phonology conversion part of the word identi®cationsystem is indeed impervious to the non-linguistic context.
In the priming studies described above, we not only
looked at intra-language phonological priming but also atcross-language priming. In particular, we showed that notonly is it possible to prime an L2 target word with an L2
homophonic prime, but also to prime an L2 target word
with an L1 homophonic prime. So, for a Dutch-Englishbilingual (but not for an English monolingual), it is possible
to prime the target word ``blame'' with the non-word``bleem'', because ``bleem'' is a pseudohomophone of the
target ``blame'' according to the Dutch spelling-soundcorrespondences. In addition, we showed that it is equally
possible to prime an L1 target word with a L2 homophonic
prime. So, the ``bleem-blame'' example also works withEnglish-Dutch bilinguals. (Incidentally, this again shows
that L2 phonology is not simply delayed relative to L1
phonology.)
Van Wijnendaele (2002, Chapter 7) asked whether the
cross-lingual L2 on L1 phonological priming effect
depended on the participants being aware of the bilingual
nature of the study (as implied by Grosjean's ``languagemode''). To answer this question, she asked two groups of
Dutch-French bilinguals (university students from Leuven)
to take part in a Dutch word recognition experiment. The®rst group of students was told that the experiment was
part of a bilingual word recognition study program and
they completed a French word recognition experimentbefore embarking on ``the Dutch part''. The second groupof students was simply told that the experimenter was
interested in Dutch word recognition (i.e., the mother
language of the students and also the language used at theuniversity). The French language was not mentioned (as a
matter of fact, special precautions were taken to make sure
that the students could not ®nd out that the experimentwas part of a Ph.D. on bilingual word recognition).
The students were told that upper-case target words
would be presented brie¯y on a computer screen betweentwo rows of hash-signs (########). Their task was to try
to recognise the word. Unknown to the students, the target
words were preceded by a tachistoscopically presented,lower-case prime (presented too shortly to be visible). Halfof the primes were Dutch non-words (homophonic or
controls, such as ``fein/foun'' for the target word ``FIJN''
[nice]); half were French non-words (e.g. ``deuque/delu'' forthe target word ``DEUK'' [dent]). The Dutch pseudo-
homophones sounded like the target words if the Dutch
letter-sound conversions were used; the French pseudo-homophones sounded like the target words if the French
letter-sound conversions were used. The hypotheses were:
(a) that the students would be more likely to identify thewords after a homophonic prime than after a graphemiccontrol prime, and (b) if Grosjean is right and if bilinguals
are able to de-activate one part of their language system,
we would not observe priming from French L2 primes onDutch L1 words when participants are not aware of the
fact that the French language matters for good perform-
ance (i.e. those participants in the monolingual mode). Theresults of the study are displayed in Table 1.
As can be seen in Table 1, there was no sign of any
signi®cant modulation of the phonological priming effectas a function of the language mode of the participants. As a
matter of fact, the priming effect was slightly larger for the
group of students who were not aware of the fact thatknowledge of French mattered (the monolingual mode)than for the students who had been informed about the
importance of the French language (the bilingual language
mode). The only difference between the groups that couldhave some implications was the tendency of the participants
in the bilingual mode to recognize fewer L1 target words200 Marc Brysbaert, Ilse van Wijnendaele and Wouter Duyckhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150when they followed a L2 prime (``deuque/delu ± DEUK'')
than when they followed an L1 prime (``fein/foun ± FIJN'';
see the ®rst column of Table 1). No such difference waspresent for the participants in the monolingual mode. This
seemed to indicate that there might be some inhibition
from L2 on L1, if (a) students are in a bilingual languagemode, and (b) there is bottom-up information in the prime
strongly pointing to L2. However, two unpublished follow-
up studies that tried to replicate this ®nding failed. There-fore, it is probably safe to assume, as Dijkstra and VanHeuven do, that the word identi®cation system is imper-
vious to non-linguistic context manipulations.References
Brysbaert, M. (1995). Arabic number reading: On the nature of the
numerical scale and the origin of phonological recoding.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 124, 434±452.
Brysbaert, M. (2001). Prelexical phonological coding of visual
words in Dutch: Automatic after all. Memory & Cognition , 29,
765±773.
Brysbaert, M. (in press). Bilingual visual word recognition: Evi-
dence from masked phonological priming. In S. Kinoshita &S. J. Lupker (eds.), Masked priming: State-of-the-art . Hove:
Psychology Press.
Brysbaert, M., Van Dyck, G. & Van de Poel, M. (1999). Visual
word recognition in bilinguals: Evidence from masked phono-
logical priming. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human
Perception and Performance , 25, 137±148.
Duyck W. & Brysbaert, M. (in preparation). Forward and back-
ward translation in balanced and unbalanced bilinguals re-
quires conceptual mediation: the magnitude effect in number
translation.
Tzelgov, J., Yehene, V., Kotler, L. & Alon, A. (2000). Automatic
comparisons of arti®cial digits never compared: Learning
linear ordering relations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition , 26, 103±120.
Van Wijnendaele, I. (2002). Cognitieve representatie van tweetalig-
heid: Visuele woordherkenning bij tweetaligen. Ph.D. thesis,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Department of Psychology.
Van Wijnendaele, I. & Brysbaert, M. (2002). Visual word recog-
nition in bilinguals: Phonological priming from the second to
the ®rst language. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human
Perception and Performance , 3, 619±627.Table 1. Percentage word identi®cation as a function
of language mode and prime type (for details, seeVan Wijnendaele, 2002, Chapter 7).
Bilingual mode Monolingual mode
deuque-DEUK 54% 65%
delu-DEUK 49% 58%
priming effect 5% 7%
fein-FIJN 71% 69%
foun-FIJN 62% 59%
priming effect 9% 10%201 Temporal delay assumption and non-linguistic context effectshttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150The BIA++: Extending the
BIA+ to a dynamicaldistributed connectionistframeworkMAUD JACQUET
ROBERT M. FRENCH
Quantitative Psychology and Cognitive Science (B32),
Department of Psychology, University of Lie Áge, 4000 Lie Áge,
Belgium.
E-mail: mjacquet@ulb.ac.be, rfrench@ulg.ac.be
Dijkstra and van Heuven have made an admirable attempt
to develop a new model of bilingual memory, the BIA+.
Their article presents a clear and well-reasoned theoretical
justi®cation of their model, followed by a description oftheir model. The BIA+ is, as the name implies, an extension
of the Bilingual Interactive Activation (BIA) model
(Dijkstra and van Heuven, 1998; Van Heuven, Dijkstra andGrainger, 1998; etc), which was itself an adaptation tobilingual memory of McClelland and Rumelhart's (1981)
Interactive Activation model of monolingual memory.
The authors provide a wealth of background on bi-
lingual memory cross-lingual interference and priming
effects in what amounts to a veritable review of the
literature in this area. The model that they propose isdesigned to account for many of these empirically observed
effects. In what follows we will center our discussion
around three points related to the design of their model.These issues are:
.the use of modular vs. distributed representations;
.learning;
.emergence and self-organization of lexical items.
We will discuss each of these points in turn.
Overview
From the earliest days of the development of computer
models of human cognitive capacities, one of the mostsigni®cant problems that hung over the entire endeavor was
the problem of hand-coded representations, or the Problem
of Representation, as it is sometimes called (see, forexample, Chalmers, French and Hofstadter, 1992; Elman,1995). Over and over again, exaggerated claims were made
for programs that supposedly discovered new mathematical
theorems, solved complex problems, made scienti®c dis-coveries, took creative leaps or discovered analogies. And,
each time, upon closer inspection, one discovered that the
real reason these programs were able to do anything at allwas because they had been given input data that had been
carefully tailored so that the desired solution was, if not
necessarily inevitable, at least not too dif®cult to produce.This does not, of course, mean that one can never use hand-
coded representations. Obviously, at some point, modelers
have to make decisions about the form of the input datathat will inevitably in¯uence the output of their programs.So the real issue is this: To what extent does the ®t of a
program's output to empirical data depend on the way in
which the raw data was ``pre-processed'' (i.e., by a human)before being presented to the program. This will become a
crucial issue in the discussion that follows.Modular vs. distributed representations
We are by no means eliminativists (e.g., Churchland, 1995)
who decry any use of any modular structures in modelingcognition. The need for modularity in programs simulating
complex cognitive abilities is obvious. On the other hand,
the addition of arbitrary processing modules every timenew data con¯icts with a previous ``boxological'' structureis not acceptable either. We believe that the necessary
modules should be able to be explained as an emergent by-
product of the architecture . This allows modelers to make
use of modularity when necessary but only insofar as it can
be explained as an emergent product of lower level mechan-
isms.
This leads us to our ®rst point of contention with the
BIA+. This model is a far cry from the old Information
Processing models of the pre-connectionist era. In keepingwith the philosophy of McClelland and Rumelhart's 1981
IA model, the letter level in the BIA+ emerges from the
primitive-feature level and the word level from the letterlevel. But then the problems begin. The letter level gives riseto the word level but, unlike the monolingual IA case, at the
word level the lexical items are separated into their respective
languages . We are never told how this might work. Of
course, if the program already knows that a word belongs
to a particular language, then the job is much easier. But
that's cheating. Little children learning two languages arerarely told explicitly that ``chien'' is a word in French, while
``bug'' is a word in English. They simply hear the two words
and they gradually learn where they belong. So, the ques-
tion for Dijkstra and van Heuven is: How could these two``language modules'' (Dutch and English) have come about
in the ®rst place? What would ``gate'' a particular word to
incorporate it in the Dutch module and how would anEnglish word be incorporated into the English module?
And, most seriously of all, what do the ``language nodes''
associated with each module correspond to? In a standardspreading-activation account with distributed internal
representations, these language nodes do not strike us as
necessary. People know they are writing in English (asopposed to, say, French) because a coherent, highly-
interconnected set of representations of ``English'' items are
currently active in their brains, period. There is no need tohave an additional, explicit ``language'' node continuallyreminding the writer that he or she is writing in English.
Further, in our reading of their description of the BIA+,
explicit language nodes would seem to pose problems thatwould not arise in the distributed network account we are
suggesting. Consider, for example, bilingual orthographic202 Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 5 (3), 2002, 202±205 #2002 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902223019http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150neighborhood effects (for example, see French and
Ohnesorge, 1996, among many other papers on thesubject). It has been shown that the recognition of a word,
W, belonging to L1, the active language, can be signi®-
cantly affected by a large orthographic neighborhood inL2, the non-active language. Now, according to the BIA+,
how would this work? If the language node corresponding
to L2 is not active, where did the inhibition of Wcome
from? On the other hand, the authors might argue that theL2 node is partially active, due to the partial activation of
the W's orthographic neighbors in L2, but that its activa-
tion is below conscious threshold. Nonetheless, if theyclaim that this sub-conscious activation level is suf®cient to
have an inhibitory effect on the word in L1, then what is
the use of having a separate language node whose partialactivation correlates perfectly with the activation of the
orthographic neighbors? Why not eliminate the language
node altogether, since the real work is being done, not by apartially activated language node but, rather, by the acti-vated and partially activated elements at the word level ?
Another point concerns the addition of a ``semantics''
module. It is certainly true that a word's semantic featuresshould be taken into account in a word identi®cation
model. For this reason, the BIA+ is, indeed, more complete
than the original BIA. However, this addition comes with aprice. For example, exactly how is semantics to be included
in the model? In particular, given that theirs is a localist
account, does this mean that there is one meaning pernode? In this case, how are the relations between and
overlap among concepts implemented? In a distributed
model with learning, one can at least suggest ways in whichthis could be accomplished, but how do the authorspropose dealing with this problem in the non-learning,
localist framework in which they are working?
The ®nal point concerns BIA+'s ``task module''. While
it is unquestionably appropriate to consider the role of task
demands, is a new module really necessary to accomplish
this? Instead, different sets of elementary processing opera-tions could be activated depending on the task require-
ments. In this way, task processing becomes ``distributed''
task processing. Task demands would then in¯uence theoperation of the system, as they should, but there would beno need for a separate ``task module''. A good example of a
memory system with integrated task speci®city is Minerva
II (Hintzman, 1984), in which there is no ``task module''per se, instead a different combination of processes is
triggered depending on the intended goal.
Learning
Our most signi®cant problem with the BIA+ model is its
lack of learning mechanisms. This means, inevitably, that
all the model's inhibitory and excitatory connections
between items at the same level and between levels must beset by hand, with all the potential problems that this canentail. One of the problems the authors run into with this
approach is the necessity of encoding inter-lexical homo-
graphs twice, once in the L1 module and once in the L2module (see section 2.5 of their article). Is this reasonable
from an interactive activation perspective? At the letter andfeature level, a Dutch-English homograph, such as
``ROOM'' (meaning ``cream'' in English) has rigorouslyidentical characteristics. Then, suddenly, at the word level,
there are twodistinct lexical items, one for Dutch and one
for English. The only justi®cation for this particular hand-coding is that the authors themselves know that ``ROOM''
is an interlexical homograph and, in order for their model
to produce the interference effects observed in Dutch-English bilinguals, this particular lexical item (as opposedto items like ``COW'') must be represented separately in the
two separate language modules within their model. It
strikes us that there should be a single lexical item,``ROOM'', that would become active (along with the
appropriate language-speci®c semantics) depending on the
active language context, a situation that would occur if themodel learned the items of the languages and the relation-
ships among them on its own. One could imagine, for
example, the statistical learning model of Christiansen,Allen and Seidenberg (1998) being extended to the case ofbilingual language learning. In short, our view is that it
would be far better for this type of model to develop its own
representations through learning , as has often been proposed
for the acquisition of a single language. Not only would
this avoid potential problems with hand-coding but the
connection strengths would be a function of directly experi-encing the languages (in written form), rather than the
work of programmers attempting to make the program
work correctly.
As we discussed in the previous section, without
learning, how do the authors propose to incorporate the
semantic level? Will they hand-code all necessary semanticrepresentations and their relationships to each other, eachwith varying strengths? This leads to the problem of scaling
up to real languages. While it might be potentially possible
for programmers to hand-code the relationships among avery small number of features, letters and lexical items of
two different languages, it is much more dif®cult ± almost
certainly impossible ± to do so as the number of itemsincreases towards those required for a real language. If the
program were able to learn to set its own synaptic weights,
the problem of scaling-up associated with hand-codingcould quite possibly be overcome.
Finally, we propose looking at the question of an
integrated vs. separate lexical store. Indeed, the authors
argue for integrated lexicons, but one has to wonder what,exactly, they mean by this. We will examine this question
next, again in the context of learning.
Integrated vs. separate lexicons
An overwhelming body of recent experimental evidence in
bilingual memory militates in favor of the idea of uni®ed
bilingual lexicons (Hermans, Bongaerts, de Bot and
Schreuder, 1998; Costa and Caramazza, 1999; Costa,Caramazza and Sebastia Ân-Galle Ás, 2000; Colome Â, 2001),
even though, functionally, bilingual memory gives the
appearance of lexical separation. In the BIA+ this is
achieved by having common feature and letter levels for thelexical items in both languages. Thereafter, at the word
level, functional language separation seems for all the203 Maud Jacquet and Robert M. Frenchhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150world to have been implemented as physical lexical separa-
tion. In other words, at the word level, the BIA+ seems toposit separate lexicons. We suggest that this language-
based word-level separation would be unnecessary in a
distributed connectionist setting.
But how could a connectionist network's highly over-
lapping internal representations of the items in both
languages also produce the high degree of functional
language separation that we experience as a bilingual?French (1998) used a simple recurrent connectionist
network (Elman, 1990) to show how this question might be
approached from the standpoint of bottom-up bilinguallanguage learning. This very simple model could arguably
serve as a starting point for a statistical, emergent approach
to bilingual language learning and storage. French pro-duced two micro-languages, Alpha and Beta, and generated
random series of sentences in each language, switching
from one language to the other from time to time, asbilinguals do. There were no explicit markings of sentencesor language switches. Below is a sample of text presented to
the network:
BOY LIFTS TOY MAN SEES PEN MAN TOUCHES BOOK GIRL PUSHES
BALL WOMAN TOUCHES TOY BOY PUSHES BOOK FEMME SOULEVESTYLO FILLE PREND STYLO GAR ON TOUCHE LIVRE FEMMEPOUSSE BALLON FILLE SOULEVE JOUET WOMAN PUSHES PEN BOY
LIFTS BALL WOMAN TAKES BOOK
After exposing the network to some 60,000 items as above,
he then examined the average hidden unit representations(i.e., activation patterns) over all words in each languageand compared them. The amount of overall overlap
between the representations of the words in the two
languages was enormous, giving the impression of veryhighly overlapping lexicons (see Figure 1 above).
In contrast, however, when a cluster analysis of the
internal representations of the words in each language wasperformed, French discovered that not only were all of the
parts of speech in each language clustered correctly, but
also the two languages themselves had developed theexactly appropriate clusters, as can be seen in Figure 2.
The simulation was later run with two larger micro-
languages containing 768 words apiece and a distributed(i.e., non-localist) encoding for the words in each language.The same high-dimensional language separation emerged
spontaneously. French was also able to show inter-lingual
homograph priming effects with this extremely simplemodel. The point is that it is at least possible to develop
bilingual memory models along these lines.Conclusion
Dijkstra and van Heuven's BIA+ model is a well-thought
out attempt to incorporate low-level mechanisms into a
high-level model of bilingual memory that accounts for theextensive experimental data showing inter-lingual priming
and interference effects. Just as the original Interactive
Activation model paved the way for the connectionistrevolution in cognitive psychology, we hope that the
ground-breaking work of these authors will naturally
evolve towards broader-based distributed connectionistnetwork models and related dynamical models of bilingualmemory, capable of learning and being able to incorporate
both the bottom-up and the top-down processing that we
know to be an integral part of bilingual language pro-cessing.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by a grant from the European
Commission HPRN-CT-2000-00065 to R. M. French.
References
Chalmers, D. J., French, R. M. & Hofstadter, D. R. (1992). High-
level perception, representation, and analogy: A critique ofArti®cial Intelligence methodology. Journal of Experimental
and Theoretical and Arti®cial Intelligence , 4, 185±211.
Christiansen, M. H., Allen, J. & Seidenberg, M. S. (1998).
Learning to segment speech using multiple cues: A con-Alpha
Beta
251117201302318619524422328
Hidden units (arranged according to activation levels)1022783216311312 29 914152621 71
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.50.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0Average activation
Figure 1. Overall overlap of the hidden-unit activations of all word repreentations for both languages.
Alpha
BetaBOY:
GIRL:
MAN:
WOMAN:
LIFTS:
SEES:
TAKES:
PUSHERS:
TOY:
BALL:
PEN:
BOOK:
GARCON:
FILLE:
FEMME:
HOMME:
SOULEVE:
POUSSE:
PREND:
VOIT:
JOUET:
BALLON:
STYLO:
LIVRE:
Figure 2. Cluster analysis of the hidden-unit representations
for the words in both languages.204 The BIA++http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150nectionist model. Language and Cognitive Processes , 13,
221±268.
Churchland, P. (1995). The engine of reason, the seat of the soul .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Colome Â, A. (2001). Lexical activation in bilinguals' speech pro-
duction: language-speci®c or language-independent? Journal
of Memory and Language , 45, 721±736.
Costa, A. & Caramazza, A. (1999). Is lexical selection in bi-
linguals language speci®c? Further evidence from Spanish-English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition ,2 ,
231±244.
Costa, A., Caramazza, A. & Sebastia Ân-Galle Ás, N. (2000). The
cognate facilitation effect: implications for model of lexicalaccess. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition , 26, 1283±1296.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Van Heuven, W. J. B. (1998). The BIA model
and bilingual word recognition. In J. Grainger & A. M.Jacobs (eds.), Localist connectionist approaches to human
cognition , pp. 189±225. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science , 14,
179±211.
Elman, J. (1995). Language as a dynamical system. In R. Port & T.
van Gelder (eds.), Mind as motion: Explorations in thedynamics of cognition , pp. 195±223. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
French, R. M. (1998). A Simple Recurrent Network model of
bilingual memory. In Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Cognitive Science Society Conference , pp. 368±373. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum.
French, R. M. & Ohnesorge, C. (1996). Using interlexical non-
words to support an interactive-activation model of bilingualmemory. Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual Cognitive
Science Society Conference , pp. 318±323. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hermans, D., Bongaerts, T., de Bot, K. & Schreuder, R. (1998).
Producing words in a foreign language: Can speakers preventinterference from their ®rst language? Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition , 1, 213±230.
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). Minerva II: A simulation model of human
memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instrument & Compu-
ters, 16, 96±101.
McClelland, J. & Rumelhart, D. (1981). An Interactive-Activation
model of context effects in letter perception, part 1: Anaccount of basic ®ndings. Psychological Review , 88, 375±405.
Van Heuven, W. J. B., Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Grainger, J. (1998).
Orthographic neighbourhood effects in bilingual recognition.Journal of Memory and Language , 39, 458±483.205 Maud Jacquet and Robert M. Frenchhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150The bilingual as an adaptive
systemDAVID W. GREEN
Department of Psychology, Gower Street, University College
London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
E-mail: d.w.green@ucl.ac.uk
Dijkstra and van Heuven lucidly summarize the important
research generated by the BIA model and provide an
excellent case for the BIA+ model with its critical separa-
tion of the identi®cation system from the task/decisionsystem. A keynote article necessarily offers a selective
exposition of the authors' thinking and so my remarks are
an invitation to expand. My ®rst question concerns thescope of the BIA+ model. My remaining questions broadly
address a key feature of the BIA+ model ± its ability to
explain performance changes as a function of taskdemands
Any cognitive system is a product of neural constraints.
Ultimately, then, it seems to me, we need to construct a
neurocognitive model of bilingualism. My ®rst questionconcerns the relationship between the BIA+ (cognitive)
model and neuroimaging data. I shall adopt the devil's
advocate position. Consider the identi®cation system. Itincludes a subsytem that explicitly represents visual word
forms. Recently, Cohen et al. (2000, 2002) proposed that
the posterior region of the left mid-fusiform gyrus is thevisual word form area because it activates when individuals
silently read brie¯y presented visual words or read words
compared to false fonts. However, this area also activatesin tasks that have nothing to do with reading words. Forinstance, it activates when individuals name the colours of
meaningless gratings compared to saying OK to the same
stimuli. It also activates when individuals press a button toindicate whether a depicted unfamiliar non-object could be
twisted or poured (see Price and Devlin, submitted).
Suppose there is no one cortical area corresponding to thevisual word form area. Instead functional specialisation
emerges from unique interactions amongst a set of regions
each ful®lling a number of different functions (e.g.,Mesulam, 1990). On the face of it, if that were true, itwould seem to be more consistent with parallel distributed
views of the visual word form system rather than the
localist representations of the BIA+ model. Non-localistmodels dispense with the explicit representation of word
form and propose that our knowledge of letter combina-
tions arises from interactions between orthographic,semantic and phonological processing Seidenberg and
McClelland, 1989; Plaut, McClelland, Seidenberg and
Patterson, 1996). To what extent do Dijkstra and vanHeuven see neuroimaging data as relevant to the BIA+
model? To what extent do they see their cognitive model as
contributing to the wider endeavour of constructing aneurocognitive model?
My second question concerns the relationship between
orthography and phonology in bilinguals. There is reason-
able agreement that visual word recognition involvesphonology. Indeed competition in the mapping of ortho-
graphy to phonology may explain the ®nding that phono-logical priming effects, compared to orthographic priming
effects, are smaller in bilingual speakers (e.g., Brysbaert, in
press). As Dijkstra and van Heuven note, there is also
reasonable evidence that the ``grain-size'' of processes thatmap orthography onto phonology differ between
languages. Languages differ in the consistency of their
mappings between orthography and phonology. Forinstance, English is less consistent than German, Italian,
Greek or Spanish. In the case of a consistent orthography,
phonology can be derived by mapping individual graph-emes (i.e., abstract letter identities) onto phonemes. So, forexample, the ``a'' in Ball, Hand and Park are pronounced
in the same way in German but in different ways in
English. It follows that the grain size of the orthographicunits required to derive a correct phonology may differ
between the languages. In the case of regular languages,
such as German, successive graphemes can be mapped ontophonemes. Naming time will, therefore, tend to increase
with word length (strictly speaking it should increase with
the number of grapheme-phoneme correspondences). Incontrast, in the case of a language such as English, with an
inconsistent orthography, a different grain size may be
required in order to produce the correct pronunciation. Forinstance, individuals may need to retrieve the phonology ofthe word body. A word body is essentially the orthographic
representation of the phonological rhyme (e.g., for Ball, the
word body is ``-all''). On other occasions, individuals mayneed to retrieve the phonology associated with the whole
word.
Ziegler, Perry, Jacobs and Braun (2001) put these
conjectures to the test. For German and English, Ziegler et
al. were able to use exactly the same set of words (e.g., Ball,
Hand, Park). They showed that word length predictednaming time for native German speakers and that body-N(the number of body neighbours of the word) predicted
naming time for native English speakers. There was a 13 ms
difference between three-letter and ®ve-letter words forEnglish speakers (pooling over body-N) and a 50 ms
difference for German speakers. In contrast, pooling over
word length, words with a large number of body neigh-bours were read 15 ms more quickly than those with a
small number of body neighbours by English speakers but
only 5 ms more quickly by German speakers.
Grain size is also important in other tasks. Rey, Ziegler
and Jacobs (2000) showed that detecting a single letter (A)
in a multi-unit grapheme (EA) in a word such as BEACH,is slower than detecting the same letter when it correspondsto a single grapheme as in the word PLACE. Readers may
also adopt mappings at different grain-sizes in a visual
search task as a function of the type of letter stringpresented. When individuals are required to detect a letter
in a subsequently presented string of ®ve random letters,206 Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 5 (3), 2002, 206±208 #2002 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902233015http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150the reaction time function relating correct detection to the
position of the target letter looks like an M slopingupwards left-to-right (Green, Rickard Liow, Tng and
Zielinski, 1996). Search times are faster and the function
linear when words are presented (Rickard Liow, Yap andGreen, in preparation). Differences in orthographic con-
sistency between languages raise empirical questions in the
study of bilingual speakers. So here is my second question:what predictions does the BIA+ model make (given itscoding scheme for sublexical orthography and phonology)
about the effects of grain size for bilingual speakers? How
adaptive is the system in this respect? For instance, willbilingual speakers of an L2 necessarily show the grain-size
effects of native speakers of that language?
My third question concerns the role of language mem-
bership information. Dijkstra and van Heuven argue that
language membership information arrives too late to affect
word recognition and that its effects would, in any case, betoo weak given that there is a one-to-many mapping fromthe language node onto lexical representations. The latter
claim is plausible but the claim that language information
arrives late may require quali®cation. Think for a momentof the role of sublexical information. Distinctive sublexical
information speeds word recognition. But such information
can signal language membership and so, in principle,information on language membership could become avail-
able before word recognition (see also work cited in
Dijkstra and van Heuven on auditory word recognition). Inconsequence, it could affect response output at a very early
stage. For instance, a change in language could signal a
change in response and so lead individuals to respond morequickly when there is a response change and a languagechange compared to when there is language change but no
change in response. One might also expect individuals to
alter their response to the cue when it proves non-predictive(see von Studnitz and Green, 2002a for evidence compatible
with these ideas).
Dijkstra and van Heuven make the strong claim that
items of the two languages are always fully activated. This
is a strong claim because, if I have understood correctly, it
implies that even when a speaker has not used a languagefor years, the lexical representations of that languagecompete, just as strongly as they ever did, with the current
language to account for the input. Experimentally, any
effects of introducing pure non-target language words in alanguage-speci®c lexical decision task must be attributable
to changes in the decision criterion or some aspect of the
task schema. In line with the research on Dutch-Englishbilinguals, von Studnitz and Green (2002b) found that
presenting a pure non-target German word in a list of
words for English lexical decision, increased RT to aninterlingual homograph such as (TAG ± ``day'' in German)
relative to an English control word, matched to the homo-
graph's English frequency. It also increased the timerequired to respond to a high-frequency English wordfollowing the homograph ± there was a carry-over effect. In
the second half of the experiment, individuals reduced the
interference effect but there was no change in the carry-over effect. One interpretation of these data is that indi-
viduals tuned a conjoint test. As Dijkstra and van Heuvennoted, such a test ®res when there is evidence of a word in
both languages. Such a test acts after word recognition tospeed response but does not affect identi®cation. This
proposal is fully consistent with the strong separation of
the identi®cation system from the task schema proposed inthe BIA+ model. However, why ± if both languages are
fully active ± was carry-over greater in this condition
compared to a condition where there was no pure Germanword? Von Studnitz and Green (2002b) proposed that suchincreased carry-over arose because there was increased
activation of either the lexical representations of the non-
target language or the units coding for language member-ship (i.e., a language tag) and that this activation fed into
the units mediating the ``no'' response. Because of compe-
tition to control output, residual activation in these unitsincreased the time required to respond ``yes'' on the follow-
ing trial.
Dijkstra and van Heuven rule out the possibility of
increased activation of lexical units. But is the secondpossibility allowed? Couldn't stimulus input increase the
activation of the units coding for language membership?
Whereas there is a one-to-many mapping of these unitsonto lexical representations, there can be a one-to-one
mapping of these units onto a response (e.g., if English,
press ``yes''). If the activation of these units is also in-variant, Dijkstra and van Heuven can explain the carry-
over effect in another way, for example, as a result of a
temporary change in the decision criterion for real high-frequency English words though such an explanation is
perhaps rather subtle.
Finally, the arena of individual differences is an impor-
tant one in bilingual research. A bilingual mental systemarises under speci®c contexts of acquisition and use.
Typically, localist models are silent on such broadly
developmental matters. Could Dijkstra and van Heuvensay a little more about individual differences in visual word
recognition in bilinguals in the light of the BIA+ model?
References
Brysbaert, M. (in press). Bilingual visual word recognition: Evi-
dence from masked phonological priming. In S. Kinoshita &S. J. Lupker (eds.), Masked priming: State-of-the-art . Hove:
Psychology Press.
Cohen, L., Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Lehericy, S., Dehaene-
Lambertz, G., Henaff, M. & Michel, F. (2000). The visualword form area: spatial and temporal characterization of an
initial stage of reading in normal subjects and posterior split-
brain patients. Brain , 123, 291±307.
Cohen, L., Lehericy, S., Chochon, F., Lemer, C., Rivard, S. &
Dehaene, S. (2002). Language-speci®c tuning of visual cortex?
Functional properties of the visual word form area. Brain ,
125, 1054±1069.
Green, D. W., Rickard Liow, S., Tng, S. K. & Zielinski, S. (1996).
Are visual search procedures adapted to the nature of the
script? British Journal of Psychology , 87, 311±326.
Marshall, J. C. & Newcombe, F. (1973). Patterns of paralexia: A
psycholinguistic approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Re-
search , 2, 175±199.
Mesulam, M. M. (1990). Large scale neurocognitive networks and
distributed processing for attention, language and memory.Annals of Neurology , 28, 597±613207 David W. Greenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150Plaut, D., McClelland, J., Seidenberg, M. & Patterson, K. (1996).
Understanding normal and impaired word reading: Computa-tional principles in quasi-regular domains. Psychological
Review , 103, 56±115.
Price, C. J. & Devlin, J. T. (submitted). The myth of the visual
word form area.
Rey, A., Ziegler, J. C. & Jacobs, A. M. (2000). Graphemes as
perceptual reading units. Cognition , 75, B1±B12.
Rickard Liow, S. J., Yap, M. J-M. & Green, D. W. (in prepara-
tion). Word identi®cation and letter search: Effects of lexi-
cality, legality, but not frequency.
Seidenberg, M. & McClelland, J. (1989). A distributed, develop-mental model of word recognition and naming. Psychological
Review , 96, 523±568.
von Studnitz, R. E. & Green, D. W. (2002a). The cost of switching
language in a semantic categorization task. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition , 5, 241±251.
von Studnitz, R. E. & Green, D. W. (2002b). Interlingual homo-
graph interference in German-English bilinguals: Its modula-
tion and locus of control. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition , 5, 1±23.
Ziegler, J. C., Perry, C., Jacobs, A. M. & Braun, M. (2001).
Identical words are read differently in different languages.
Psychological Science , 12, 379±384.208 The bilingual as an adaptive systemhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150Bilingual word recognition
beyond orthography: Onmeaning, linguistic contextand individual differencesJANET G. VAN HELL
University of Nijmegen, Department of Special Education,
PO Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
E-mail: J.vanHell@ped.kun.nl
Central questions in psycholinguistic studies on bi-
lingualism are how bilinguals access words in their two
languages, and how they control their language systemsand solve the problem of cross-language competition. In
their excellent paper ``The architecture of the bilingual
word recognition system: From identi®cation to decision'',Dijkstra and Van Heuven expound their BIA+ model onbilingual word recognition. BIA+ builds on its predecessor
BIA, one of the ®rst connectionist models on bilingual
word recognition. BIA+ preserves one of BIA's crucialassumptions, namely that the bilingual lexicon is integrated
across languages and is accessed in a language non-selective
way, an assumption that is supported in many empiricalstudies and that is now widely accepted in the bilingual
literature. Compared to the original BIA model, the BIA+
architecture is further developed (in fact, much more sothan the subtle `plus' denotes). BIA+ now includes ortho-
graphic, as well as phonological and semantic representa-
tions in the word identi®cation system, and a distinction ismade between a word identi®cation system and a task/decision system. This latter extension resembles the
language task schemas in Green's (1998) Inhibitory
Control model. Dijkstra and Van Heuven also distinguishbetween effects of linguistic and non-linguistic context on
performance: linguistic context effects, that arise from
lexical, syntactic and semantic sources, are assumed toaffect the activity in the word identi®cation system,
whereas non-linguistic effects, that can arise from instruc-
tion, task demands or participant expectancies, areassumed to affect the task/decision system.
Dijkstra and Van Heuven's BIA+ model is a compre-
hensive model of bilingual word recognition and opens new
ways of approaching word recognition in bilinguals and thecontrol mechanisms involved. A compelling perspective of
the model is that a bilingual is not conceived of as a
computational system that operates in isolation and isintrinsically context-free, but as a system that acts in
context and continuously interacts with and adapts to
linguistic and non-linguistic contextual factors. The latterview is also a central assumption in the dynamical system
perspective on cognition and language (e.g., Elman, 1995;
Van Gelder, 1998). Though it may not always be easy todisentangle linguistic from non-linguistic information in alanguage situation (cf. the effects of stimulus list com-
position), Dijkstra and Van Heuven's description of speci®c
contextual factors and their in¯uence on the word identi®-cation process and task/decision system inspires the formu-
lation of hypotheses to be tested in future studies.Speci®cally, how words are recognized in natural sentence
and discourse contexts is an important goal in future
research and may form a critical test of the validity andplausibility of bilingual word recognition models, including
BIA+.
In this commentary, I mainly focus on the word identi-
®cation system and substantiate Dijkstra and Van Heuven'smain points by bringing in and elaborate on some central
issues in dynamical and connectionist approaches to cog-
nition and language: time, ¯exibility, context and idio-syncrasy. Speci®cally, I will focus on bilingual word
identi®cation in light of temporality, the ¯exibility of word
meanings and cross-linguistic code overlap, contextualinformation and grammatical class, and individual differ-
ences among bilinguals.
The word identi®cation system in the BIA+ model
consists of orthographic, phonological and semantic repre-
sentations, which implies that word recognition can be
affected by spelling, sound and meaning, an assumptionalso made by models on monolingual word recognition inadults (e.g., Van Orden and Goldinger, 1994) and children
(e.g., Bosman and Van Orden, 1997; Bosman and Van
Hell, in press). Dijkstra and Van Heuven propose that theconnections between these three codes are interactive and
bi-directional, and that the three codes interact (resonate)
over time. At a general level, the resonance assumption hasimportant implications with respect to theoretical perspec-
tives on how language behavior unfolds in time, and differs
in fundamental ways from the perspective adopted infeedforward networks (see, e.g., Elman, 1995 for moredetails). Moreover, the postulation of bi-directional con-
nections has important consequences for the activation
¯ow within the word identi®cation system: activation ¯owsfrom orthographic codes to phonological and semantic
codes (feedforward activation), and also feedback from
semantic and phonological codes to orthography (feedbackactivation). Thus, following initial activation, recurrent
feedback dynamics begin among all these three codes. The
bi-directional ¯ow of activation among the three codes andthe role of feedback activation in visual word recognition is
under lively debate in the monolingual literature, for
example in relation to (in)consistencies in the mappingsbetween phonology and orthography (Stone, Vanhoy andVan Orden, 1997) and semantics and orthography (e.g.,
Pecher, 2001). Though the role of feedback activation
remains largely implicit in Dijkstra and Van Heuven'smodel, given that BIA+'s word identi®cation system is
highly interconnected across orthographic, phonologicalBilingualism: Language and Cognition 5 (3), 2002, 209±212 #2002 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902243011 209http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150and semantic codes and across languages, feedback activa-
tion from phonology to orthography and from semanticsto orthography will also affect bilingual word recognition
(cf. Tokowicz, Kroll, De Groot and Van Hell, 2002).
The addition of semantic representations is an impor-
tant enrichment in BIA+, and enhances its explanatory
power considerably. Dijkstra and Van Heuven discuss
semantic representations mainly in the light of their ®nd-ings on interlingual homographs (like room meaning
`cream' in Dutch) and cognates (like Dutch-English ®lm),
and assume that interlingual homographs do not share
meaning and cognates do. Recent studies suggest, however,that cross-linguistic semantic overlap ranges across a con-
tinuum (e.g., De Groot, Dannenburg and Van Hell, 1994;
Van Hell and De Groot, 1998) and that even at theendpoint of the scale, featuring the cognates, semantic
overlap is graded. More speci®cally, Van Hell and De
Groot (1998) asked Dutch-English bilinguals to associatetwice to the same stimuli on different occasions, once in thelanguage of the stimuli (within-language) and once in the
other language (between-language). It appeared that the
within- and between-language associations for concretecognates were more often translations of one another than
those for abstract cognates, and retrieving an associate was
easier for concrete cognates than for abstract cognates.This suggests that cognates can differ in their degree of
semantic code overlap.
Though Dijkstra and Van Heuven do not explicitly
describe the representational format the semantic infor-
mation is coded in, the assumption of cross-linguistic code
overlap and co-activation within the semantic systemwould ®t in with current ideas on the nature of wordmeanings, and with the basic architecture of the distributed
feature model on semantic representation in bilingual
memory. The classical idea that words have a ®xedmeaning and that the meaning of a word can be captured
by de®ning a set of individually necessary and jointly
suf®cient features is called into question by an increasingnumber of scientists, on theoretical or on empirical
grounds. Opponent theorists objected that it is very dif®cult
to construct lists of de®ning features for words, andargued, for example, that there is no principled way todistinguish essential features from non-essential features.
They brought up white tigers that violate the `being-striped'
feature but that are still considered tigers (Armstrong,Gleitman and Gleitman, 1983), or concepts that meet all
features, but still would not be adorned with the corre-
sponding label (e.g., ``Is Tarzan a bachelor?'', see Lakoff,1987). Moreover, Labov (1973) obtained compelling evi-
dence that concept boundaries are graded and vary with
the context of use. Word meanings can thus be considered``slippery customers'' (Labov, 1973, p. 341): rather than
consisting of a set of de®ning features, word meanings are
vague, have fuzzy boundaries and depend on the context.
The idea that word meanings are slippery customers is
central in recent views on conceptual representation in
memory (e.g., Barsalou, 1993; Hummel and Holyoak,
1997). Rather than assuming that word meanings are stablestructures that are stored in long-term memory and
retrieved when needed, it is proposed that word meaningsare dynamically constructed in working memory, and can
vary widely in the conceptual features that are incorpo-rated. This notion predicts that people conceptualize the
same word differently on different occasions. This is corro-
borated in the above-mentioned word association study(Van Hell and De Groot, 1998): it appeared that associative
responses were more often not repeated than repeated, even
in the condition in which participants performed the sametask twice in their native language. Furthermore, associ-ations to abstract words, noncognates and verbs were less
often repeated within- and across-languages than those to
concrete words, cognates and nouns. We explained these®ndings in terms of the distributed feature model, in which
the meaning of words is represented in terms of distributed
features. Word meaning is conceived of as graded and¯exible, and the similarity of the semantic representations
of two words is a function of the conceptual feature overlap
of the words. It is further proposed that cross-linguisticconceptual feature overlap ranges across a continuum, andthat the overlap of some translation equivalents, e.g.,
concrete nouns and cognates, is higher than that of others,
e.g., abstract nouns and noncognates (see, e.g., De Groot,1992; Kroll and De Groot, 1997; Van Hell, 1998; Van Hell
and De Groot, 1998 for more extensive discussions). Cross-
linguistic overlap may thus range across a continuum in theorthographic and phonological codes (e.g., Dijkstra,
Grainger and Van Heuven, 1999; Van Hell and Dijkstra, in
press), as well as semantic codes. Moreover, the set offeatures that is activated is not a static entity, and may
depend on factors like the context in which the word is
embedded.
As already mentioned above, its emphasis on the explicit
role of contextual factors in bilingual language perform-
ance is a cogent quality of BIA+. In the recent past,
considerable progress has been made in understandingbilingual recognition and production of isolated words.
Surprisingly few studies focused on how word recognition
or production operates in context, in particular sentence ordiscourse context. In their discussion of linguistic context
effects, Dijkstra and Van Heuven propose that the word
identi®cation system interacts with the sentence parsingsystem, and that the recognition of words in sentencecontext is sensitive to syntactic and semantic information
from both languages: word recognition and syntactic and
semantic effects are language-nonselective. This proposalopens up important questions for future research, one of
them being the question Dijkstra and Van Heuven discuss
in some detail, namely how sentence constraints in¯uencethe generation of featural restrictions for upcoming words
and how they thus delineate the activation of lexical and
conceptual elements within and across languages.
A related question pertains to the temporal aspects of
sentence processing and word identi®cation processes in L2
and L1. To describe the delayed activation of L2 phono-logical and semantic codes relative to the L1 codes in theword identi®cation system, Dijkstra and Van Heuven intro-
duce a temporal delay mechanism. Does this mechanism
also affect the activation of syntactic and semantic infor-mation during sentence processing? What are the conse-
quences for cross-linguistic effects in L1 and L2 sentence210 Janet G. van Hellhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150processing? Furthermore, Dijkstra and Van Heuven's
model opens up the question of how the sentence parseroperates in bilinguals. Do bilinguals, and in particular
those who learned their L2 at a time when their L1
processing system was already well-developed, like the latebilinguals that were tested in the experiments that inspired
BIA+, use their L1 parsing routines when reading L2
sentences, or do they use L2 parsing routines? This issuepoints to the importance of control in solving cross-language competition of the sentence parsing routines. An
early and partial answer to such questions is provided by
studies in which L2 speakers are compared with mono-lingual speakers of the same language (see Kroll and
Dussias, in press, for a comprehensive review). The avail-
able evidence shows that in processing semantic incongrui-ties, differences between the two speakers were quantitative
only and arose because semantic processes were slowed
down in L2 speakers (e.g., Weber-Fox and Neville, 1996).Evidence from studies investigating syntactic parsing is lessconclusive, however: L2 speakers have been found, for
example, to behave like monolingual speakers, to behave
qualitatively differently, or to transfer L1 informationwhen processing in L2. What these studies at least suggest
is that language-speci®c syntactic properties (e.g., in verb-
argument structure) may challenge the universality andlanguage-independence of the processing routines that are
used to read sentences in L1, in L2 or in both languages.
A discussion of the role of linguistic context effects in
word recognition draws attention to the different gramma-
tical functions of words in a sentence. Behavioral research
on bilingual word recognition (and production) largelyignored the grammatical characteristics of words and usedwords from one grammatical class only, nouns. This
implies that theoretical models of word recognition,
including BIA+, in fact describe noun recognition. Mono-lingual, cross-linguistic and bilingual studies have found,
however, that lexical processing is different for nouns and
verbs, and suggested that verbs (often denoting relationalconcepts) have a greater breadth of meaning than concrete
nouns (denoting referential concepts; Gentner, 1981), and
that the meanings of verb translations are less similaracross languages than those of concrete nouns (Van Helland De Groot, 1998). Furthermore, lexical processing of
open class words (content words: nouns, verbs, adjectives)
differs from closed class words (function words, includingarticles, conjunctions and prepositions; e.g., Pulvermu Èller,
1999), and context effects are not necessarily the same for
these two groups of words (Van Petten and Kutas, 1991).Such effects of grammatical class may constrain existing
models of word recognition, including bilingual word
recognition, and may affect theories of word recognitionand syntactic and semantic effects in sentence processing. A
profound understanding of how words are recognized in
context and how the word identi®cation system interactswith syntactic and semantic information thus not only asksfor research on word recognition in context, but also for
further research on isolated word recognition in which the
grammatical class of words is varied.
A ®nal point I would like to bring up pertains to
individual differences among bilinguals, including differentlevels of L2 ¯uency. Though the primary focus of BIA+ is
not to explain how word recognition is modulated byindividual differences, Dijkstra and Van Heuven touch on
some mechanisms that may account for differences between
less and more pro®cient bilinguals: differences in the restinglevel activation of the orthographic representations in the
word identi®cation system or (small) variations in para-
meters in the decision process. These mechanisms may wellexplain differences in word recognition in speakers withdifferent ¯uency levels (e.g., Schulpen, Dijkstra and
Schriefers, cited in Dijkstra and Van Heuven's article; Van
Hell and Dijkstra, in press), it remains to be seen whetherthey can also describe differences between more or less
pro®cient L2 speakers processing language beyond the
isolated word, as observed in sentence processing studies.For example, in an ERP study using L2 speakers with
different levels of exposure to their L2 (and who also differed
in pro®ciency), Weber-Fox and Neville (1996) found sub-stantial amplitude and distribution differences between bi-linguals with different levels of L2 exposure in syntactic
processing (although brain systems mediating semantic
processing of sentences appeared relatively robust againstdifferent levels of L2 exposure). In addition to differences in
L2 exposure and pro®ciency, several recent studies suggest
that individual differences between bilinguals in L2 learningrate (Osterhout, McLaughlin, Inoue and Loveless, 2001)
and reading span (Kroll, Michael, Tokowicz and Dufour,
2002) may modulate cross-language processing. In theirpaper, Dijkstra and Van Heuven point out that one of the
aspects that should be considered in the future is how
BIA+ would develop over time and during learning.Though I fully concur in the importance of modeling thecontinuing process of language learning and development
in novice and ¯uent bilinguals, I would add to the agenda a
focus on individual differences among bilinguals.
From the discussion above it is evident that Dijkstra
and Van Heuven's inspiring model opens new approaches
to the structure and dynamics of bilingual word recognitionbeyond the isolated word. A further testing of the ideas
outlined in their paper will enhance our understanding of
bilingual language processing.
References
Armstrong, S. L., Gleitman, L. R. & Gleitman, H. (1983). What
some concepts might not be. Cognition , 13, 263±308.
Barsalou, L. (1993). Flexibility, structure, and linguistic vagary in
concepts: Manifestations of a compositional system of per-ceptual symbols. In A. F. Collins, S. E. Gathercole, M. A.Conway & P. E. Morris (eds.), Theories of memory , pp.
29±101. Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bosman, A. M. T. & Van Hell, J. G. (in press). Orthography,
phonology, and semantics: Concerted action in word per-ception. In L. Verhoeven, C. Elbro & P. Reitsma (eds.),
Precursors of functional literacy . Amsterdam & Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Bosman, A. M. T. & Van Orden, G. C. (1997). Why spelling is
more dif®cult than reading. In: C. A. Perfetti, L. Rieben & M.
Fayol (eds.), Learning to spell: Research, theory, and practice
across languages , pp. 173±194. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.211 Bilingual word recognition beyond orthographyhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150De Groot, A. M. B. (1992). Bilingual lexical representations: A
closer look at the conceptual representations. In R. Frost & L.Katz (eds.), Orthography, phonology, morphology, and
meaning , pp. 389±412. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
De Groot, A. M. B., Dannenburg, L. & Van Hell, J. G. (1994).
Forward and backward word translation by bilinguals.
Journal of Memory and Language , 33, 600±629.
Dijkstra, A., Grainger, J. & Van Heuven, W. J. B. (1999). Recog-
nition of cognates and interlingual homographs: The neglectedrole of phonology. Journal of Memory and Language , 41,
496±518.
Elman, J. L. (1995). Language as a dynamical system. In R. F.
Port & T. Van Gelder (eds.), Mind as motion: Explorations in
the dynamics of cognition , pp. 195±225. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between verbs and
nouns. Cognition and Brain Theory , 4, 161±178.
Green, D. W. (1998). Mental control and the bilingual lexico-
semantic system. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition ,1 ,
67±81.
Hummel, J. E. & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed representa-
tions of structure: A theory of analogical access and mapping.
Psychological Review , 104, 427±466.
Kroll, J. F. & De Groot, A. M. B. (1997). Lexical and conceptual
memory in the bilingual: Mapping form to meaning in two
languages. In A. M. B. De Groot & J. F. Kroll (eds.), Tutorials
in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives , pp. 169±199.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kroll, J. F. & Dussias, P. E. (in press). The comprehension of
words and sentences in two languages. In T. Bhatia & W.
Ritchie (eds.), Handbook of bilingualism . Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell Publishers.
Kroll, J. F. Michael, E., Tokowicz, N. & Dufour, R. (2002). The
development of lexical ¯uency in a second language. Second
Language Research , 18, 137±171.
Labov, W. (1973). The boundaries of words and their meanings. In
C.-J. N. Baily & R. W. Shuy (eds.), New ways of analyzing
variation in English , pp. 340±373. Washington, DC: George-
town University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, ®re, and dangerous things . London: The
University of Chicago Press.Osterhout, L., McLaughlin, J., Inoue, K. & Loveless, J. (2001).
Brain activity in L2 learning . Paper presented at the Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society, March 25±27,
New York.
Pecher, D. (2001). Perception is a two-way junction: Feedback
semantics in word recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review , 8, 545±551.
Pulvermu Èller, F. (1999). Words in the brain's language. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences , 22, 253±279.
Stone, G. O., Vanhoy, M. & Van Orden, G. C. (1997). Perception
is a two-way street: Feedforward and feedback phonology in
visual word recognition. Journal of Memory and Language , 36,
337±359.
Tokowicz, N., Kroll, J. F., De Groot, A. M. B. & Van Hell, J. G.
(2002). Number of translation norms for Dutch-English trans-
lation pairs: A new tool for examining language production.Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers , 34,
435±451.
Van Gelder, T. (1998). The dynamical hypothesis in cognitive
science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 21, 615±628.
Van Hell, J. G. (1998). Cross-language processing and bilingual
memory organization. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Am-
sterdam.
Van Hell, J. G. & De Groot, A. M. B. (1998). Conceptual
representation in bilingual memory: Effects of concreteness
and cognate status in word association. Bilingualism: Lan-
guage and Cognition , 1, 193±211.
Van Hell, J. G. & Dijkstra, A. (in press). Foreign language know-
ledge can in¯uence native language performance in exclusively
native contexts. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review .
Van Orden, G. C. & Goldinger, S. D. (1994). Interdependence of
form and function in cognitive systems explains perception of
printed words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance , 20, 1269±1291.
Van Petten, C. & Kutas, M. (1991). In¯uences of semantic and
syntactic context on open- and closed-class words. Memory
and Cognition , 19, 95±112.
Weber-Fox, C. M. & Neville, H. J. (1996). Maturational con-
straints on functional specializations for language processing:ERP and behavioral evidence in bilingual speakers. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience , 8, 231±256.212 Janet G. van Hellhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150Bilingualism is in dire need of
formal modelsPING LI
Department of Psychology, University of Richmond,
Richmond, VA 23173, USA.
E-mail: pli@richmond.edu
Each year the Cognitive Science Society honors David
Rumelhart by awarding the Rumelhart Prize to an out-standing cognitive scientist whose research makes a signi®-
cant contribution to the formal analysis of human
cognition. Formal models of language, including those ofRumelhart and his associates, are well known to psycho-
linguists in the monolingual context. The formalism of
language in the bilingual context, however, is lamentable: tothis date, there are only a handful of models (connectionist
or otherwise) that are designed speci®cally to account for
bilingual language processing and acquisition (cf. Li andFarkas, 2002). BIA is one of them. BIA+ is now another.
Bilingualism research is faced with a dilemma today.
While the ®eld lacks formal models like BIA and its
variant, researchers must deal with a large number ofcrucial variables or factors that are believed to in¯uence
bilingual language processing, a number that starts to
exceed our short-term memory buffer. These factors, as canbe discerned from the keynote article, include (minimally)
bilingual pro®ciency, history of learning, time of L2
learning, task demand in experimentation, type of words inthe lexicon being tested, similarity structure of the two
languages and bilingual speech mode. It is dif®cult to make
sense of a bilingual study that does not control for thesevariables ± indeed, many studies either ignore them inexperimentation or fail to take them into account in inter-
pretation (see discussions in Grosjean, 1998). Now the
question is, how can one control for all of these variables inany study? Formalism gets us out of the dilemma with a
handy control of parameters in one sweep.
The extension of BIA to BIA+ is one example of how
we can explain bilingualism more precisely by considering
more variables and adding newer mechanisms to the
model. For example, Dijkstra and van Heuven point outthat the explanatory power of BIA has been limited by itslexical representations, its ability to handle context effects
and its lack of an implemented task structure. BIA+ goes
beyond these limitations by incorporating phonologicalrepresentations, linguistic and non-linguistic context
effects, and a task-decision component.
But even this is not enough. As Dijkstra and van
Heuven acknowledge, there are many other aspects that
need to be considered for bilingual word recognition. One
future direction they mention is how the model woulddevelop over time in learning. In this regard, I argue that
the study of language representation in adults should
ultimately be connected to research in developmental bi-lingualism (to echo a similar point made by Bialystok,2001). Formal models of bilingualism may take an initiative
in making this connection. Such a connection can poten-
tially reconcile con¯icting results in empirical research. Forexample, a central argument of BIA and BIA+ is that on-
line access to the bilingual lexicon is language-independent,in contrast to the language-selective view of bilingual
lexical access. However, it may be the case that develop-mentally, both language-independent access and language-
selective access are possible, depending on the level of
pro®ciency in bilingual language development. For highlypro®cient bilinguals, orthographic overlap in the bilingual
lexicon leads to inhibitory effects in the access of words in
the target language (Bijeljac-Babic, Biardeau and Grainger,1997), providing evidence for language-independent access
to the bilingual lexicon. For the beginning bilingual
learners, however, such inhibitory effects may be muchweaker or nonexistent, as shown in Bijeljac-Babic et al.'sstudy, in which bilingual pro®ciency was manipulated, thus
providing evidence for language-selective access. This situ-
ation is analogous to lexical ambiguity processing in themonolingual context, where exhaustive access or selective
access of multiple meanings of an ambiguous word depends
on factors such as strength of context bias, frequency ofeach of the multiple meanings, and density of the com-
peting meanings. Although BIA (and BIA+) is able to
simulate this type of effects in bilingualism, for the mostpart, the model remains a ``pro®cient bilingual model''
rather than a ``developmental bilingual model''.
Cognitive theories of language are notoriously dichot-
omous. Yet language use is a complex human behavior thatlies on a continuum of multiple dimensions, and this
complexity is re¯ected even more strongly in bilingual
language processing and bilingualism in development.Thus, the very phenomenon of bilingualism requires that
our interpretations take into account diverse perspectives
and be non-dichotomous in nature (cf. Grosjean, 1998).Formal models of bilingualism can facilitate this process, as
demonstrated by BIA and BIA+. In addition, contrary to
Dijkstra and van Heuven's conclusion that the imple-mentation of the model must wait for the accumulation ofempirical knowledge, I would argue that modeling allows
us to consider crucial factors more effectively, and that it
can generate predictions that aren't yet available inempirical research but can be tested in empirical studies.
References
Bialystok, E. (2001). Bilingualism in development: Language, liter-
acy, and cognition . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bijeljac-Babic, R., Biardeau, A. & Grainger, J. (1997). Masked
orthographic priming in bilingual word recognition. Memory
& Cognition , 25, 447±457.
Grosjean, F. (1998). Studying bilinguals: Methodological and con-
ceptual issues. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition ,1 ,
131±149.
Li, P. & Farkas, I. (2002). A self-organizing connectionist model of
bilingual processing. In R. Heredia & J. Altarriba (eds.),Bilingual sentence processing , pp. 59±85. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science Publisher.Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 5 (3), 2002, 213 #2002 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902253018 213http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150How do bilinguals control
their use of languages?ARDI ROELOFS
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, P.O. Box 310,
6500 AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
E-mail: ardi@mpi.nl
Dijkstra and Van Heuven sketch the BIA+ model for
visual word processing in bilinguals. BIA+ differs in anumber of respects from its predecessor, BIA, the leading
implemented model of bilingual visual word recognition.
Notably, BIA+ contains a new processing component thatdeals with task demands. BIA+ has not been computation-
ally implemented yet and design decisions still need to be
taken. In this commentary, I outline a proposal formodeling the control of tasks in BIA+.
The issue of task demands and executive control is
clearly an important one. Conversations are driven bywilled goals ± speakers and writers try to achieve commu-nicative intentions, and listeners and readers try to recover
these intentions. Bilinguals have more than one language
available for use. Thus, action goals such as addressing aninterlocutor in one language need to be protected against
the inadvertent use of the other language. As concerns
bilingual reading, Dijkstra and Van Heuven argue thatword recognition is not controlled ± a letter string activates
all compatible words regardless of their language. However,
activated words may be responded to in multiple ways, forexample, they may be read aloud, translated or be subjected
to a language or lexical decision. Dijkstra and Van Heuven
review evidence suggesting that the values of control para-meters like decision thresholds may vary depending on thelanguage and task situation. Clearly, what task to perform
and responses to select is under the control of a language
user.
Before the cognitive revolution in psychology in the
middle of last century, associationist and behaviorist
theories accounted for task performance and responseselection by postulating associations between stimuli and
responses. However, if all responses were determined
entirely by stimulus-response associations, readers wouldnot be free to choose which response to make to a letterstring, because the strongest association (e.g., oral reading)
would control the response. When readers are asked to
perform one particular task (e.g., language decision) ratherthan another (e.g., oral reading), they are able to do it,
usually without (much) practice. In some way or another,
goals can be set to control responding.
On one prominent view, advocated by Norman and
Shallice (1986) for cognition in general and adopted by
Green (1998) for the control of languages in bilinguals,executive control is achieved by associatively biasing activa-
tion levels of responses. Goals are ``internal stimuli'' that
favor certain response types. For example, the implementedmodels of Cohen, Dunbar and McClelland (1990) andGilbert and Shallice (2002) achieve goal-directed respond-
ing by task nodes connected to response pathways in a
lexical network. The task nodes selectively activate onepathway (e.g., for language decision) rather than another
(e.g., for oral reading).On another prominent view, advocated by Anderson
(1983) among others and implemented in WEAVER++(Roelofs, 1992, 1997; Levelt, Roelofs and Meyer, 1999),
responding is controlled through explicit reference to goals.
WEAVER++ combines a lexical network with condition-action production rules that determine what is done with
the activated lexical information depending on the task.
When a goal is placed in working memory, the attention ofthe system is focussed on those production rules that
include the goal among their conditions. Production rules
provide ¯exibility in responding by allowing tasks to bespeci®ed through a combination of response types andvariables such as ``read the stimulus aloud'', ``translate the
stimulus from language xinto y'', ``decide whether the
stimulus is from language x'', whereby xand ycan take on
the values ``Dutch'' and ``English'' in Dutch-English bi-
linguals.
Elsewhere, I have made a case for goal-referenced
control of language use (Roelofs, in press). The control of
language use has in its simplest form perhaps been most
intensively studied by employing the color-word Strooptask (Stroop, 1935) and analogs of it. The basic variant of
the Stroop task asks for naming the ink color of color
words. Participants are slower and make more errors innaming the ink color of an incongruent color word (e.g.,the word red in blue ink) than in naming the color of Xs,
which shows the in¯uence of executive control: the ink
colors are named rather than the color words read at thecost of slower responding and more errors.
It has been shown that WEAVER++ successfully simu-
lates sixteen classic data sets on Stroop, mostly taken fromthe review by MacLeod (1991), including incongruency,
congruency, reverse Stroop, response set, semantic
gradient, time course, stimulus, spatial, multiple task,manual, bilingual, training, age, and pathological effects(Roelofs, in press). With only three free parameters taking
two values each to accommodate task differences (color
naming, picture naming, word reading, manualresponding), the model accounts for ninety six percent of
the variance of the sixteen studies (two hundred ®fty data
points). Moreover, WEAVER++ successfully simulates thehuman brain's blood ¯ow response during Stroop task
performance in neuroimaging studies, in particular, the
fMRI BOLD response in the anterior cingulate cortex, oneof the classic brain areas involved with executive control
(Roelofs & Hagoort, 2002). It appears that existing associ-
ationist models of control cannot account for criticalaspects of the data, whereas WEAVER++ can.
Performing a bilingual color naming Stroop task by
bilinguals not only calls for naming the ink color rather
than reading the word, but it also requires selecting theresponse from the target language. For example, when a
Dutch-English bilingual has to use English in naming the214 Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 5 (3), 2002, 214±215 #2002 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902263014http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150ink color of the Dutch word rood (red) in blue ink, correct
responding not only requires preventing the selection of theresponse ``rood'' but also requires preventing the selection
of the Dutch translation equivalent of the English target
response ``blue'', Dutch ``blauw''. Stroop interferenceoccurs between the languages of bilinguals (e.g., reading
Dutch rood interferes with the production of ``blue'' in
response to rood in blue ink), but the effect is not as great
as that within either one of the languages.
Language-speci®c responding may be achieved by
marking the words in memory for language, as done in BIA
and WEAVER++ and proposed for BIA+, and specifyingthe target language in the production rules for response
selection, as done in WEAVER++. Simulations have
revealed that WEAVER++ accounts for the ®nding thatinterference is greater within than between languages
(Roelofs, in press). As Dijkstra and Van Heuven argue for
BIA+, critical is how the activated words from the non-target language are used. In performing a bilingual Stroop
task, the words in the non-target language are not consid-
ered for selection but still compete indirectly by activating
competitor responses in the target language via their sharedmeaning (e.g., Dutch ``rood'' activates English ``red'',
which competes with English ``blue'' in naming the ink
color of the Dutch word rood in blue). The indirect
competition by words from the non-target language
explains why the interference is reduced between compared
to within languages.
Stroop interference between languages supports BIA+'s
and WEAVER++'s assumption that words of the non-
target language are processed up to the semantic level inreading. This assumption agrees with the results of a widerange of chronometric studies on bilingual word recogni-
tion, reviewed by Dijkstra and Van Heuven, but it is at
odds with a recent electrophysiological and fMRI study byRodriguez-Fornells, Rotte, Heinze, No Èsselt and Mu Ènte
(2002). In this study, bilingual Spanish-Catalan and mono-
lingual Spanish readers were instructed to press a buttonwhen reading words in Spanish and to ignore pseudowords
and words in Catalan. The evoked electrical brain poten-
tials of both the bilinguals and the monolinguals weresensitive to the frequency of the words in Spanish but notin Catalan. Furthermore, the brain's blood ¯ow response
to Spanish words was greater in the posterior inferior
frontal cortex and the planum temporale for the bilingualsthan for the monolinguals. These areas have been shown to
be involved in phonological processing by previous
research. According to Rodriguez-Fornells et al., theseresults suggest that bilingual readers may prevent activation
of the words from the non-target language by selectively
accessing the lexicon of the target language throughapplication of language-speci®c sublexical grapheme-to-
phoneme correspondence rules and blocking direct visual
lexical access for both languages.
However, if bilingual readers can control reading routes,
the simplest way to prevent between-language interference
in Stroop color naming would be to block all readingroutes. But the Stroop ®ndings suggest that bilingual
readers are unable to accomplish this. The absence of aneffect on brain potentials and the difference in brain activa-
tion between monolinguals and bilinguals does not imply,
however, that bilingual word recognition is controlled. Thebilingual Stroop ®ndings indicate that between-language
effects on the use of activated lexical information are
reduced compared to within-language effects. Reducedeffects for words from the non-target language may lead toan absence of an effect of non-target language words on
brain potentials. Furthermore, the availability of two
languages rather than one may lead to more extensiveprocessing before responding in bilinguals compared to
monolinguals, which may explain the fMRI data.
To conclude, the burgeoning literature on bilingual
word recognition is leading theorists to think more and
more about issues of control. In modeling executive
control, an associationist approach is not the only way togo, however. In developing the task component of BIA+,goal-referenced control warrants serious consideration.
References
Anderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition . Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Cohen, J., Dunbar, K. & McClelland, J. (1990). On the control of
automatic processes: A parallel distributed processing account
of the Stroop effect. Psychological Review , 97, 332±361.
Gilbert, S. M. & Shallice, T. (2002). Task switching: A PDP model.
Cognitive Psychology , 44, 297±337.
Green, D. W. (1998). Mental control of the bilingual lexico-
semantic system. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition ,1 ,
67±81.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A. & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory of
lexical access in speech production. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences , 22, 1±38.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the Stroop
effect: An integrative review. Psychological Bulletin , 109,
163±203.
Norman, D. A. & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action: Willed
and automatic control of behavior. In R. J. Davidson, G. E.Schwarts & D. Shapiro (eds.), Consciousness and self-
regulation: Advances in research and theory (vol. 4), pp. 1±18.
New York: Plenum Press.
Rodriguez-Fornells, A., Rotte, M., Heinze, H.-J., No Èsselt, T. &
MuÈnte, T. (2002). Brain potential and functional MRI evi-
dence for how to handle two languages with one brain.Nature , 415, 1026±1029.
Roelofs, A. (1992). A spreading-activation theory of lemma re-
trieval in speaking. Cognition , 42, 107142.
Roelofs, A. (1997). The WEAVER model of word-form encoding
in speech production. Cognition , 64, 249±284.
Roelofs, A. (in press). Goal-referenced selection of verbal action:
Modeling attentional control in the Stroop task. Psychological
Review .
Roelofs, A. & Hagoort, P. (2002). Control of language use:
Cognitive modeling the hemodynamics of Stroop task per-
formance. Cognitive Brain Research , 15, 85±97.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology , 18, 643±662.215 Ardi Roelofshttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150Theories that developM I C H A E LS .C .T H O M A S
School of Psychology, Birkbeck College, University of
London, Malet St., London WC1E 7HX, UK.
E-mail: m.thomas@psychology.bbk.ac.uk,
m.thomas@ich.ucl.ac.uk
The target article represents a signi®cant advance in the
level of sophistication applied to models of bilingual word
recognition, and Dijkstra and van Heuven are to be con-gratulated on this endeavour. Bearing in mind the success of
the (computational) BIA model in capturing detailed pat-
terns of experimental data, I look forward to future simula-tion results from the BIA+ when the proposals of this new
framework are implemented. It is an essential step to draw a
distinction between recognition systems and the decisionmechanisms that drive responses, and the authors haveprovided a novel way of apportioning empirical evidence of
context effects in bilingual word recognition across this
divide. Given the explanatory weight now being placed ondecision mechanisms rather than the word recognition
system itself, perhaps indeed it is now time to make some
simplifying assumptions about the recognition system andstart building detailed computational models of the decision
component of the system. Implementation will provide the
clarity of theorisation and evaluation of theory viabilitythat have been the hallmark of the BIA model thus far.
However, in this commentary, I want to focus on one
particular avenue of theory development which is as yetunder-explored in the BIA+ framework. This is how thecognitive structures of the bilingual's word recognition
system are acquired and maintained. Dijkstra and van
Heuven comment ``there are many other aspects of bi-lingual word recognition that should be considered in the
future (for instance, how the model would develop over
time and during learning)'' (p. 181). It is quite right, ofcourse, to take one step at a time. It is enough work trying
to explain the mass of bilingual word recognition data via a
static model of the adult system, and the authors haveoutlined a proposal with great potential on that front.However, many of the interesting issues that characterise
the bilingual language system are dynamic ones (Thomas &
van Heuven, in press).
For example, how are two languages acquired, and the
appropriate integrated-yet-differentiated representations
established? To what extent are there critical periods or ageof acquisition effects in the acquisition of an L2? To what
extent are there transfer effects between ®rst and second
languages? How is an L2 best acquired ± by initial associ-ation to an existing L1 or by a strategy that encourages
direct contact with semantics (such as picture naming)?
How is each language maintained, in terms of on-goingpatterns of relative dominance and/or pro®ciency, and towhat extent are effects modality speci®c (i.e., differential
across spoken and written language, comprehension and
production)? How is each language lost, in terms ofaphasia after brain damage in bilinguals, or in terms of the
natural attrition of a disused language?All of these questions demand a dynamic aspect of
models of the bilingual system. But the point is not just
about the features of bilingualism that remain to beexplained. It also concerns the way one goes about con-
structing a model. For example, at times as I have watched
the development of the BIA and now BIA+ framework, Ihave had a sense that the model is chasing the empirical
data rather than predicting it. The authors have rarely put
forward strong opinions about which features should be inthe model and which not: whether there should be top-down connections or not; whether these connections should
be inhibitory or not; whether interlingual homographs
should have one or two representations; whether ortho-graphic neighbourhoods should be facilitatory or inhibi-
tory; whether phonological similarity should be inhibitory
or facilitatory; and so on. There is little in the way oftheory-driven expectation. Rather, data are presented and
the model's assumptions altered accordingly. Indeed, some-
times the model's assumptions are altered between experi-ments, as in the case of the cross-language top-down
inhibition in the BIA invoked to simulate one set of results
but not another.
Now, this isn't necessarily a bad way of model building.
Dijkstra, van Heuven and colleagues have made a great
deal of progress building on existing static models from the
monolingual literature. However, a complementaryapproach might seek to generate expectations based on
what function the relevant cognitive system has developed
for. What tasks is the system required to achieve in its
normal usage? What representations is it therefore likely to
learn to optimally succeed in these tasks (based on reason-
able assumptions of the learning mechanisms available)?
These are not idle questions. A developmental perspec-
tive suggests theoretical possibilities for the structure of the
adult system as well. Two examples will suf®ce, both
theoretical issues that Dijkstra and van Heuven spend sometime considering.
What is the role of language membership? The BIA/
BIA+ framework proposes that word nodes are present inan integrated network where each node has a link to a
language node, which marks its membership. Part of the
debate concerns the subsequent role of the activity thatarrives at each language node. Inspection of the BIA
implementation reveals that the connections between word
nodes and language nodes are of identical value. Languagemembership is postulated to be a uniform construct. But isthis really a sensible outcome of a plausible learning
system? Let us say that the strength of the connection
between a word node and its language node is establishedby Hebbian learning, where the language context estab-
lishes the activity on the language node at the same time as216 Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 5 (3), 2002, 216±217 #2002 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902273010http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150the word node is activated, and their correlated activity
strengthens the connection. Will every word node be associ-ated with an equal degree of language context/language
node activation? Will every word node be activated equally
frequently? It seems unlikely.
In contrast, if we take a learning perspective, the
expectation is that the system will evolve the processing
structures suf®cient to achieve the task at hand. In thiscase, the aim of the system is to provide the correct output(meaning) given the input (word form). Perhaps language
context information will only be used in situations where it
is necessary, for example, to disambiguate inputs that aresimilar across languages but require different outputs.
Under this view, language membership may not be an all or
nothing tag, but a continuum that depends on the demandsof the task. Words with phonological or orthographic
features unique to a language may not need to be tagged,
whereas words with common features may lean moreheavily on language membership information to dis-ambiguate them.
(One might argue that all of a bilingual's words must
have a language tag in order that the individual can answerthe question ``To which language does this word belong?''
But such information could simply constitute encyclopaedic
knowledge, part of the word's meaning. The extent towhich language membership needs to assume an active
processing status in the bilingual lexicon is a separate
question.)
The second example follows on from this idea of the
constraints of learning . Dijkstra and van Heuven debate
whether interlingual homographs might have one or tworepresentations in the bilingual lexicon, and whether cog-nates might have a special status. In constructing a static
model, such distinctions must indeed take the form of a
priori decisions. From a learning perspective, however, the
system must ®nd its own answer to this question, depending
on the task that is being asked of it. If word form is to be
identi®ed, the representations need be no different forhomographs/homophones, and increased frequency of
exposure to the form across languages will likely improveresponse times and accuracy. But if the system is required
to map from word form to semantics, interlingual homo-
graphs must have quite different representations, and likelymust exploit language context information to drive this.
Moreover, the degree to which each input form is associ-
ated with each meaning in the two languages is likely tohave a material effect on the ef®ciency with which thesystem can generate each meaning; that is, the low fre-
quency meaning of an interlingual homograph will be
accessed more slowly (see Thomas, 1997 for a computa-tional learning system exhibiting these characteristics).
In the same way that Dijkstra and van Heuven have
built on existing static models of monolingual word recog-nition to account for phenomena within the bilingual
domain, there now exists a host of monolingual develop-
mental models addressing diverse phenomena. In the future,
it will be possible to speak to many of the salient issues inbilingualism identi®ed above, including issues of language
acquisition, language dominance, language control and
language loss (Thomas and van Heuven, in press).
The target article represents impressive progress in the
development of theories of bilingual word recognition. In
the future, one hopes that the models themselves will bepermitted to develop too.
References
Thomas, M. S. C. (1997). Distributed representations and the
bilingual lexicon: One store or two? In J. Bullinaria, D. Glass-pool & G. Houghton (eds.), Proceedings of the 4th Annual
Neural Computation and Psychology Workshop , pp. 240±253.
Berlin: Springer.
Thomas, M. S. C. & van Heuven, W. J. B. (in press). Computa-
tional models of bilingual comprehension. In A. M. B. De
Groot & J. F. Kroll (eds.), The handbook of bilingualism:
Psycholinguistic approaches. Oxford: Oxford University Press.217 Michael S. C. Thomashttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150AUTHORS' RESPONSE
Modeling bilingual word
recognition: Past, presentand futureTON DIJKSTRA
WALTER J. B. VAN HEUVEN
Nijmegen Institute for Cognition and Information (NICI),
Montessorilaan 3, P.O. Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.
E-mail: dijkstra@nici.kun.nl, heuven@nici.kun.nl
The detailed comments of our colleagues on our keynote
article suggest that they all value the integration of varioussorts of empirical data into one formalized model of bi-
lingual word recognition. Taking this position, our peers
propose further speci®cations or adaptations of the pro-posed BIA+ model with respect to its representations,
processes or control structure; and they indicate what, in
their view, should be the next step in model development orempirical testing. We are grateful for their contributions,which we will carefully think through in the coming time
and use as a basis for future implementations.
In their commentaries, our colleagues of course do not
only provide support for our model, but they also express
different opinions about our modeling enterprise. We will
discuss their major points of criticism in three sections,related to the following issues. First, commentators differ
in their views of how one should model bilingual word
recognition processes. Although they appear to agree that aformalized connectionist model of bilingual word recogni-
tion is useful, several believe that a distributed connec-
tionist approach may be more correct or fruitful in the longrun than the localist approach of the BIA+ model. Second,some authors provide interesting critical comments on
certain model aspects in relation to available, sometimes
recent, empirical data. We will respond to these comments,using them also to clarify aspects of the BIA+ model that
have led to misunderstandings. Finally, commentators
propose directions for future research and we will providesome ®rst ideas where to go.
How to build a model of bilingual word recognition
As Li points out in his comments on the keynote article,
there are so many variables that affect bilingual word
recognition that one hardly knows where to begin todevelop a formalized model. However, there are so many
advantages to formalized (and implemented) models that,
in spite of all dif®culties, it is worth our while to make theattempt at capturing at least the most important aspects of
word recognition in a formal model (see Dijkstra and De
Smedt, 1996 for a discussion of the advantages of computa-tional models). The BIA+ model, building on the BIA
model, makes a step towards a more complete formaliza-
tion including the major determining factors in wordrecognition although its computational implementation isstill far from complete.
The basic problem of formalizing behavioral data from
a particular subdomain of reality is, as Jerry Fodor (1987,Chapter 3) has expressed it, ``how to carve nature at its
joints''. In other words, the question is how the subdomainshould be simpli®ed to ensure that the most important
determinants of behavior are incorporated and interactcorrectly. The simulations of a successful model will mimic
the behavior that is observed in the subdomain, and an
examination of its internal architecture and processes willhelp us to better understand the behavior in terms of a
complex interaction between multiple underlying causal
mechanisms. While some researchers focus on importantvariables in adult lexical processing as a starting point formodeling, others consider the learning process and model
dynamics as more important. Far from being unique to
bilingual word recognition, this important issue has perme-ated cognitive science at large. Quite clearly, as Thomas
points out, how one starts may affect where one ends, and
focussing on one modeling aspect may lead to a relativeneglect of another. Nevertheless, it seems useful to begin
with a more simple model and then work towards a more
complex one, and to build more complex models on thebasis of earlier ones (nested modeling, see Jacobs and
Grainger, 1994).
Each modeler must decide which aspects of the domain
of interest should be taken as having to do with structure
(relatively unchanging aspects of reality) and which with
process (quickly changing aspects). This does not only hold
for Interactive Activation (IA or localist connectionist)models, but also for Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP
or distributed connectionist) models. For instance, PDP
models are also restricted to learning in a particularsubdomain (even though all aspects of reality are present
simultaneously), and they presume the availability of repre-
sentations such as letters or syllabic units (Dijkstra, inpress). More generally, both IA and PDP models appear tohave their strengths and weaknesses (see Grainger and
Jacobs, 1998; Page, 2000 for the advantages of IA models).
Model development is stimulated by empirical research
on the one hand, but it can drive empirical research on the
other. Thus, as Li points out, modeling and experimenta-
tion should go hand in hand. However, in some areas, likebilingual sentence processing, so few data are available as
yet that it is not obvious what it is exactly that we wish to
model.
Are the BIA and BIA+ models only ``chasing empirical
data'' (accounting for data only after they are collected), as
Thomas puts it? We do not believe so. Admittedly, theBIA+ model has been adapted to account for recentempirical data, but it is based on explicit assumptions that
generate new and testable predictions ± as is seen, for
instance, in the comments by Brysbaert, Van Wijnendaeleand Duyck on our paper. We do not agree that we ``have
rarely put forward strong opinions about which featuresBilingualism: Language and Cognition 5 (3), 2002, 219±224 #2002 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728902283017 219http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150should be in the model or not''. This becomes obvious if we
examine Thomas's examples. In line with their IA modelingframework, the architecture of the BIA and BIA+ models
from the very beginning implies the presence of interactions
within the language processing system, e.g., between wordrepresentation levels. This interactivity can lead to top-
down inhibition effects, the presence of which can be
demonstrated empirically. (In other words, we have moreof a problem to explain the absence of top-down inhibition
from language nodes to words than its presence.) In
addition, the BIA+ model explicitly states that non-
linguistic context does not lead to top-down inhibition
effects on the word identi®cation system (note that hardly
any connectionist models have concerned themselves with
the relation to the task/decision system). This predictionstands in direct contrast to that of other views of language
processing, such as the language mode hypothesis, the BIA
model and the Inhibitory Control model.
Furthermore, the BIA/BIA+ models dopredict the
direction of orthographic neighborhood effects, but accord-
ing to them this direction is dependent on the organiza-
tional characteristics of the lexicon(s) in question (see VanHeuven, Dijkstra and Grainger, 1998). As a consequence,
the precise predictions cannot be made without taking the
lexicon into account; they must be obtained by conductingmodel simulations with the lexicon(s). Such simulations can
be considered as expressing the speci®c, context-sensitive
predictions of the model. A similar point can be made forphonological similarity effects: depending on the ortho-
graphic and phonological characteristics of the lexicon
involved, they will be facilitatory if particular (e.g., sub-lexical and lexical) units facilitate each other or if phono-logical activity can speed responses, and they will be
inhibitory if (e.g., lexical) units compete for selection or
response (see Jacobs, Rey, Ziegler and Grainger, 1998, formonolingual simulations with MROM-p). Here, again,
simulations are needed to yield speci®c predictions,
although knowledge of the interactive principles of IAmodels may help to formulate general expectations.
With respect to interlingual homographs, BIA+ explic-
itly assumes two orthographic representations. Thereappears to be some misunderstanding in how this choicewas made. When we were developing the BIA model in
collaboration with our colleague Jonathan Grainger, he
rightly pointed out that the intuitively appealing implemen-tation choice within the IA tradition was to have only one
orthographic representation for interlingual homographs.
(In some simulations we used two, but for practical reasonsonly, because BIA did not include phonological or semantic
representations that might allow differentiation.) However,
recent empirical data indicate that this option cannot becorrect (see section 4.2 in the keynote article). Thus, ``the
only justi®cation for this particular hand-coding'' (Jacquet
and French) is not that we as authors ``know that `ROOM'is an interlexical homograph'', but it is the empiricalevidence that we cannot ignore. Now, of course, the burden
is on us to show that simulations with two representations
will allow us to mimic empirical data involving interlingualhomographs.
The BIA/BIA+ models make a distinction betweenlexical and language representations. In contrast to what
Jacquet and French argue, words are notseparated into
different languages at the lexical level, but only at the
higher level of the language nodes. All words are repre-
sented in the same way in a pool of items that is not itselfdifferentiated by language. All words affect each other in
the same way (through lateral inhibition), and all are
connected to the same letter pools. Thus, BIA and BIA+do not assume separate lexicons at the word level, but oneintegrated or uni®ed bilingual lexicon. The misunder-
standing may have arisen because of the ®gure of the
model, in which English and Dutch words are labeled assuch for the readers' sake.
The studies referred to by Colome Â(2001) and Costa and
Caramazza (e.g., 1999) on language production are com-patible with our position. Indeed, these authors provide
evidence supporting parallel lexical activation of word
candidates in different languages and their proposed selec-tion mechanism for word production has some commonal-ities with ours for comprehension. We do not agree with
Jacquet and French that people know they are writing in
English because an ensemble of English representations is``currently active in their brains, period''. Word production
research shows that lexical candidates from both languages
of the bilingual initially become active and languagemembership can serve as a selection cue for ®ltering out
words from the non-target language (Kroll, Dijkstra,
Janssen and Schriefers, 1999; Kroll and Dijkstra, 2002).
In the BIA/BIA+ models, word-speci®c language
membership information becomes available only via the
word level. Language information is less important inBIA+ because it is purely representational and provides aweak source of constraint on word recognition only. Never-
theless, the language labels are assumed to become avail-
able to the reader at only a short delay relative to wordidenti®cation. In contrast to Thomas, we believe that the
knowledge that a word belongs to a particular language is
not merely encyclopaedic but useful to and used by thebilingual. For instance, we assume that in language decision
participants use the language representation to make their
decision which button to press, and in order to retrieve theitem's language membership, they have to identify the item.
In contrast to Jacquet and French' opinion, the BIA+
and BIA models can account quite well for between-
language neighborhood effects even without resorting tothe language nodes (Dijkstra and Van Heuven, 1998). The
mechanisms of lateral inhibition between word nodes,
adaptations of the resting level activation of wordsdepending on subjective frequency, and possible adapta-
tions of decision criteria, appear to be suf®cient to account
for the data patterns observed by French and Ohnesorge(1996) and ourselves (Van Heuven et al., 1998).
As Thomas points out, the BIA and BIA+ connections
between word nodes and language nodes are of identicalvalue, making language membership what he calls ``auniform construct''. Indeed, in an IA approach, the con-
nection weights between representations of different levels
are usually (but not necessarily) hand-set at one normalizedvalue (for instance, depending on the total number of
connections between levels). This practice follows the prin-220 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150ciple of parsimony , and it considerably reduces the number
of model parameters. The connection strengths for differentwords are usually equated at a mean value under the
assumption that ignoring their differences will not system-
atically affect average responding. In the present case, thisleads to an interesting prediction. If the weights between
representation levels should be set at different values, as
Thomas suggests, latencies for low frequency words shouldincrease more than for high frequency words in tasks wherethe response is read out from the language node level
relative to tasks where it is read out from the lexical level.
This is not predicted in case all weights between levels areset equally. However, it may be that this hypothesis can
only be tested empirically if additional assumptions are
made.
Empirical aspects of the BIA+ model
Following the IA model of monolingual word recognition,
the BIA model made the structural choice of incorporating
only letter and word representations, and no intermediate
representations such as syllables. For BIA+ we are stillexperimenting with sublexical units larger than letters or
phonemes, e.g., Onset±Nucleus±Coda (ONC) units (Van
Heuven, 2000). Obviously, in order to do any modeling atall, a choice has to be made, but any choice may be at the
expense of model ¯exibility and the ability to account for
particular data sets (Dijkstra, in press). In line with Green'sargumentation, certain grain-size effects may be impossible
to simulate without assuming particular intermediate levels
(see Martensen, Maris and Dijkstra, 2000, for evidence thatthe grain size of word recognition units may be differentacross languages).
An interesting question is which grain-size effects will
turn out to be dependent on lexical characteristics (ortho-graphy, phonology) and possible to simulate, and which
will be out of the model's range (e.g., certain strategic
effects). For example, we found that certain word bodyeffects (Ziegler and Perry, 1998) emerged in a simulation
with a monolingual model incorporating ONC units, even
though word body representations were not explicitlyincluded. The effect appeared to be a consequence of theorganization of the orthographic and phonological lexicons
used by the model. However, given the simpli®cations that
will have to be made, the present architecture of the BIA+model will almost certainly turn out to be too simple to
capture certain subtle cross-linguistic or cross-modal
effects. (Thus, it may be necessary to develop differentmodels for different purposes.)
Grain size differences also play a role with respect to the
involvement of sublexical and lexical phonology in bi-lingual word recognition. According to the ``temporal
delay'' hypothesis, L2 phonological and semantic codes are
delayed in activation relative to L1 codes, depending on thepro®ciency of the bilingual. Evidence supporting this viewwas found in the study by Lemho Èfer and Dijkstra (sub-
mitted). We wish to make two remarks with respect to the
temporal delay hypothesis. First, the hypothesis is lexical in
nature, having to do with the activation of lexical rather
than sublexical representations. With respect to sublexicalrepresentations, the BIA+ model assumes that words from
different languages having the same script share theirletters and some of their phonemes (cf. Roelofs, in press).
As a consequence, sublexical cross-linguistic priming effects
might be independent of word frequency, in line with therecent study by Van Wijnendaele and Brysbaert (2002).
Second, even though the lexical-phonological and
semantic L2 codes are generally delayed relative to L1codes, the effect depends on the subjective frequency of theitem in question. For instance, for interlingual homographs
with low frequency Dutch readings and high frequency
English readings, English phonology or semantics couldstill be retrieved earlier in time. Thus, the delay will not be
constant for all types of words, as Brysbaert et al. assume.
Notwithstanding these remarks, we take to heart Brysbaertet al.'s caveat that interactions between cross-linguistic
codes may be more dynamic than implied by the term
``temporal delay assumption''. It will be interesting to seethe limits to which the lexical hypothesis can be pushed.
Several colleagues pointed out that our empirical
research and modeling has so far paid relatively little
attention to semantic/conceptual issues (Kroll and Dussias,in press; Van Hell; Jacquet and French; and Brysbaert et
al.). That is true. We have been doing preliminary simula-
tions involving a semantic association network (VanHeuven, 2000), but this work has only just started. On the
empirical side, we have recently obtained cross-linguistic
effects of morphological family size on interlingual homo-graphs in collaborative work with Baayen (MPI) and
Schreuder's (IWTS) research group. The morphological
family of a word consists of those morphologically relatedwords that contain the word as a member (e.g., ``appel-taart'' is in the family of ``appel'', see De Jong, 2002).
Morphological family size effects appear to be at least
partly semantic in nature. Our analyses indicate thatDutch-English interlingual homographs are affected in an
opposite way by the size of their morphological families
in both languages. Thus, evidence for yet another inde-pendent variable shows that bilingual word recognition is
thoroughly language non-selective.
Referring to studies mentioned by Kroll and Dussias (in
press), Van Hell rightly points out that the explanation of(in particular) syntactic effects of sentence context on the
recognition of target words in bilinguals may require
incorporating a whole new apparatus into the BIA+ model.We agree with her that ``language-speci®c properties may
challenge the universality and language-independence of
processing routines''. However, we note that the researchrationale so far has been to test the non-selective access
view for processing domains where non-selectivity is pos-
sible at all. For language-speci®c phenomena (at sublexical,lexical and syntactic levels), language-speci®c results are
bound to be found. However, even for language non-
speci®c phenomena the issue may be quite complex, as isshown by a pilot experiment conducted in our lab (Caelen,1998). When Dutch participants processed Dutch (L1)
sentences with temporarily ambiguous subject- and object-
relative clauses, they appeared to use mainly syntacticsources of information to resolve the ambiguity. The same
held for German participants performing in their L1,221 Modeling bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150German. In contrast, the performance of Dutch-German
bilinguals with respect to German (L2) sentences wasaffected by both syntactic and semantic information (a
®nding that has also been reported for monolinguals under
more demanding circumstances). Possibly, the larger pro-cessing load for L2 sentence processing in bilinguals led to
performance differences relative to L1 processing that were
both quantitative (latencies) and qualitative (effects ofsyntax and semantics).
Roelofs considers which role a non-linguistic factor such
as attention can play in experiments if it does not directly
modulate activation in particular processing pathways. Asan alternative, he suggests that the attention can be
focussed on those production rules in the task schema that
include the readers' goal among their conditions. As far aswe can see, goal-referenced control as he envisions it can
readily be implemented in the BIA+ model, also because
the results of bilingual Stroop tasks appear to be directlycompatible with BIA+.
Green points out that readers might become sensitive to
subtle sublexical language-speci®c sources of information
in the input word, in order to speed their responses, forinstance, in a language decision task. Studies on cue
validity indeed suggest that (even unaware) participants in
experiments may sometimes exploit probabilistic relation-ships between stimulus and response. However, whether
this holds for sublexical information correlated with
language membership remains to be empirically (re)-con®rmed (cf. Grainger and Beauvillain, 1987). Further-
more, because this proposed mechanism operates only
bottom-up, it could in principle be implemented in theBIA+ framework.
Green further describes a mechanism that accounts for
carry-over effects between trials that we believe to be
compatible with the BIA+ model. In this context, he refersto the notion of ``full activation'', a term we used in our
paper. However, we apparently were not clear enough in
our explanation of the term. We do not believe that ``evenwhen a speaker has not used a language for years, the
lexical representations of that language compete, just as
strongly as they ever did, with the current language toaccount for the output''. The resting activation levels ofrepresentational units are assumed to decrease if a language
is not used for a while (Dijkstra and Van Hell, in press). As
a consequence, such representations will experience morelateral inhibition exerted by their lexical competitors during
recognition. The accompanying changes in the pattern of
activation of the various competitors will affect themoment in time the response is made.
Finally, we note that the explicit distinction between the
word identi®cation system and the task/decision systemfacilitates our understanding of how performance differs
across experimental situations. This approach clari®es
which elements of the task and recognition process areaffected differently in different tasks. In our view, thisprovides a strong advantage for the modeler relative to
approaches that merely inform us of the priority of con-
tributing factors in different situations or that providedifferent matrices of learned connection weights (cf.
Thomas).Future work
In their comments, our colleagues point to important
empirical domains that remained unmentioned, such as
second-language acquisition and learning (Li; Thomas;Jacquet and French), interindividual differences (Green;
Van Hell), and the relationship between functional model-
ing and the brain (Green). As any researcher will under-stand, we have concentrated our research and modelingefforts on those areas where our expertise is greatest. It is,
therefore, at the risk of sounding naã Ève that we offer some
thoughts about potential model development in these areas.
With respect to acquisition issues, we would like to
point out that the BIA/BIA+ framework appears to be
quite compatible with and complementary to recent ver-sions of the Revised Hierarchical Model (RHM) by Kroll
and her colleagues (e.g., Kroll and Sunderman, in press).
This model incorporates an account of second-languageacquisition not present in the BIA+ model, and several ofthe questions raised by Thomas could be answered in terms
of the RHM (see Hulstijn, 2002 for further considerations
on second-language acquisition). As one example of thecompatibility of the BIA+ model and the RHM, we may
consider that the RHM hypothesized that in early L2
learners, translation equivalents were active at the lexical-association level (e.g. stoel [D] ± chair [E], while the BIA+
focussed on the cross-linguistic effect of form relatives (e.g.,
stoel [D] ± steel [E]. Recent evidence by Sunderman andKroll suggests that both effects are present. Form relatives
are active for learners at both early and late stages of
second-language acquisition, just as BIA+ predicts.However, translation associates may be active only for thelearners at the earliest stages of L2 acquisition. Changes in
form activation due to increases in L2 pro®ciency may be
accounted for in the BIA+ model by adjusting the restinglevel activations (re¯ecting subjective frequency), but this
will not account for the presence or absence of translation
activity. However, BIA+ does not disagree with the RHMhere, simply because additional assumptions about lexical
association and semantics are needed in order to account
for the effects observed for translation equivalents.
With respect to more general aspects of learning, we
point out that, even though distributed (PDP) connectionist
models are well-known for their learning capabilities,
localist connectionist models such as BIA can be made tolearn as well. A good example is the work by Grossberg
(1987), who introduced a learning mechanism in his
Adaptive Resonance Theory (ART); also see Happel andMurre, 1994; Burton, 1998).
Even without modeling second-language learning pro-
cesses or increases in L2 pro®ciency directly, one cansimulate bilingual word recognition performance for bi-
linguals at different pro®ciency levels. For instance, to
simulate the lexical decision data for two high-schoolgroups, we will adapt the L2 word frequencies in the BIA+model separately for each pro®ciency group (Schulpen,
Dijkstra and Schriefers, in preparation).
Most simulations with the BIA model (including those
still valid for BIA+) have tried to mimic patterns of RTs
averaged across participants or item categories. However,222 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuvenhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150in principle some or even all parameters of the model can
be ®t individually for each participant or item. Thus, someinterindividual differences can be simulated by the BIA+
model. However, it will require extensive experimentation
and complex parameter setting procedures to ®t the data.Parameters that could be varied are resting level activation
(re¯ecting subjective frequency), bottom-up activation and
inhibition between letter and word levels, and decisioncriteria (e.g., amount of activation required for ``yes''responses).
Finally, Green brings up the complex and general issue
of the relationship between neuroimaging data and func-tional models, of which BIA+ is only one example. In our
view, the fast development of cognitive neuroscience is
exciting and it is our conviction that any complete model ofbilingual language processing should ultimately take into
account reliable data from multiple sources, including
brain activity data and behavioral data.
However, at present, the relationship between function-
ally distinct (soft) modules and localization in the brain is
not well understood. An important insight, we think, is that
functional models are based on behavioral data and are notmodels of brain functioning. There appears to be a many-
to-many mapping between components in our functional
models and areas in the brain. On the one hand, onefunction can be associated with activity in different parts of
the brain. This already holds for language processing as a
whole, which (although functionally differentiated) takesplace in both hemispheres (Federmeider and Kutas, 1999).
At a more speci®c level, Kaan and Swaab (2002) argue that
syntactic processing does not recruit one speci®c area in thebrain but that a whole network of areas is involved. On theother hand, one brain area may be engaged in various
functions, as Green points out in his commentary. This
observation makes it particularly hard to allocate a psycho-logical interpretation to certain electrophysiological and
neuroimaging data. For instance, with respect to ERP-
measurements the P600 component was assumed to be amarker in the EEG associated with syntactic violations, but
recently this interpretation has been challenged (Kolk,
Chwilla, Van Herten and Oor, submitted).
In sum, systematic patterns of brain activity need not
directly correspond to the conceptual entities in our func-
tional models. Observations like these suggest that lin-
guistic functions shown to be distributed in the brain neednot be distributed in our functional models for behavior.
However, a demonstration that different brain areas are
systematically engaged in different subfunctions, might befollowed by the collection of empirical evidence for a
related distinction in behavioral data and then by changes
in the model.
Given the current state of affairs, we do not ®nd it
surprising that different studies may collect apparently
paradoxical results at least for some time to come. Anexample pointed out by Roelofs and Van Hell is the recentERP/fMRI study by Rodrigues-Fornells, Rotte, Heinze,
NoÈsselt and Mu Ènte (2002), which is interpreted by the
authors as evidence that ``words from the non-targetlanguage are rejected at an early stage before semantic
analysis in bilinguals''. Roelofs argues that the ®ndings ofthis study do not imply controlled language-speci®c access.
He points out that reduced effects for words from the non-target language may lead to an absence of effects on brain
potentials, and that bilinguals process words from two
languages in contrast to the monolinguals.
We would like to add a few points of our own. First, the
conclusion was partially based on the ERPs for non-target
words and pseudowords, items that did not require explicitresponses. Thus, it is questionable if the conclusion may begeneralized to the target words. In fact, in a recent ERP
study of our own (Kerkhofs, Dijkstra, Chwilla and De
Bruijn, in preparation), the N400s for interlingual homo-graphs were sensitive to the relative frequency of their
readings in both the target and non-target language.
Second, the authors' conclusion leaves open the possibilityof parallel activation of orthographic lexical candidates
from different languages. Third, the response hand for the
go-stimuli in the study depended on the ®rst letter (vowelor consonant) of the stimulus, which complicated theparticipants' task, possibly leading to strategy changes and
to extra activation of sublexical phonological pathways. In
sum, it would be premature to return to a version of thelanguage-selective access view that ignores the many RT
studies supporting parallel activation of word candidates at
the semantic/conceptual level.
In spite of these and other challenges, we must continue
to relate our functional models to brain imaging data. For
instance, the distinction between the word identi®cationsystem and the task/decision system proposed by Green's
Inhibitory Control model and the BIA+ model could be
re¯ected in the brain by activity in the temporal lobe (e.g.,the posterior mid-fusiform gyrus or word form areareferred to by Green) and activity in the anterior cingulate
cortex (cf. Roelofs and Hagoort, submitted). We have
planned to test this view in an event-related fMRI variantof the experiments by Dijkstra, Van Jaarsveld and Ten
Brinke (1998). The relative brain activity in the three
experiments might support the view that the linguisticprocessing aspects remain similar across experiments, while
the task demands and control aspects change.
References
Burton, A. M. (1998). A model of human face recognition. In J.
Grainger & A. M. Jacobs (eds.), Localist connectionist ap-
proaches to human cognition , pp. 75±100. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Caelen, M. (1998). Extending the study on the processing of relative
clauses to bilingualism . Master's thesis, University of Nijmegen.
Colome Â, A. (2001). Lexical activation in bilinguals' speech pro-
duction: language-speci®c or language-independent? Journal
of Memory and Language , 45, 721±736
Costa, A. & Caramazza, A. (1999). Is lexical selection in bilinguals
language speci®c? Further evidence from Spanish-English bi-linguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition , 2, 231±244.
De Jong, N. H. (2002). Morphological families in the mental
lexicon. Ph.D. thesis, University of Nijmegen.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (in press). Word recognition and lexical access
II: Connectionist approaches. In D. A. Cruse, F. Hunds-
nurscher, M. Job & P. R. Lutzeier (eds.), Lexikologie ±
Lexicology . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. (Article 265.)
Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & De Smedt, K. (1996). Computer models in223 Modeling bilingual word recognitionhttp://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 05 Feb 2015 IP address: 193.255.248.150psycholinguistics: An introduction. In A. (Ton) Dijkstra & K.
De Smedt (eds.), Computational psycholinguistics: AI and con-
nectionist models of human language processing , pp. 3±23.
London: Taylor & Francis.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Van Hell, J. G. (in press). Testing the
Language Mode hypothesis using trilinguals. International
Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism .
Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Van Heuven, W. J. B. (1998). The BIA model
and bilingual word recognition. In J. Grainger & A. M. Jacobs(eds.), Localist connectionist approaches to human cognition ,
pp. 189±225. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dijkstra, A. (Ton), Van Jaarsveld, H. & Ten Brinke, S. (1998b).
Interlingual homograph recognition: Effects of task demandsand language intermixing. Bilingualism: Language and Cogni-
tion, 1, 51±66.
Federmeier, K. D. & Kutas, M. (1999). Right words and left
words: Electrophysiological evidence for hemispheric differ-ences in meaning processing. Cognitive Brain Research ,8 ,
373±392.
Fodor, J. (1987). Psychosemantics: The problem of meaning in the
philosophy of mind . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/A Bradford
Books.
French, R. M., & Ohnesorge, C. (1996). Using interlexical non-
words to support an interactive-activation model of bilingualmemory. Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual Cognitive
Science Society Conference , pp. 318±323. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Grainger, J. & Beauvillain, C. (1987). Language blocking and
lexical access in bilinguals. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology , 39A, 295±319.
Grainger, J. & Jacobs, A. M. (1998). On localist connectionism
and psychological science. In J. Grainger & A. M. Jacobs
(eds.), Localist connectionist approaches to human cognition ,
pp. 1±38. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Grossberg, S. (1987). Competitive learning: From interactive acti-
vation to adaptive resonance. Cognitive Science , 11, 23±63.
Happel, B. L. M. & Murre, J. M. J. (1994). Design and evolution
of modular neural networks. Neural Networks , 7, 985±1004.
Hulstijn, J. (2002). Towards a uni®ed account of the representa-
tion, processing and acquisition of second language know-
ledge. Second Language Research , 18, 193±223.
Jacobs, A. M. & Grainger, J. (1994). Models of visual word
recognition: Sampling the state of the art. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance , 20,
1311±1334.
Jacobs, A. M., Rey, A., Ziegler, J. C. & Grainger, J. (1998).
MROM-p: An interactive activation, multiple readout model
of orthographic and phonological processes in visual word
recognition. In J. Grainger & A. M. Jacobs (eds.), Localist
connectionist approaches to human cognition , pp. 147±188.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kaan, E. & Swaab, T. Y. (2002). The brain circuitry of syntactic
comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 6, 350±356.
Kerkhofs, R., Dijkstra, A. (Ton), Chwilla, D. J. & De Bruijn, E.
(in preparation). How relative word frequency affects RTs
and ERPs to interlingual homographs in bilingual semantic
priming. [working title]Kolk, H. H. J., Chwilla, D. J., Van Herten, M. & Oor, P. J. W.
(submitted). Structure and limited capacity in verbal workingmemory: A study with event related potentials.
Kroll, J. F. & Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (2002). The bilingual lexicon. In
R. Kaplan (ed.), Handbook of applied linguistics , pp. 301±321.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kroll, J. F., Dijkstra, A. (Ton), Janssen, N. & Schriefers, H.
(1999). Cross-language lexical activity during production: Evi-
dence from cued picture naming. Paper presented at the
European Society for Cognitive Psychology, Ghent, Belgium,
September.
Kroll, J. F. & Dussias, P. E. (in press). The comprehension of
words and sentences in two languages. In T. Bhatia & W.Ritchie (eds.), Handbook of bilingualism . Cambridge MA:
Blackwell Publishers.
Kroll, J. F. & Sunderman, G. (in press). Cognitive processes in
second language acquisition. In C. Doughty & M. Long (eds.),Handbook of second language acquisition . Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell Publishers.
Lemho Èfer, K. & Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (submitted). Recognizing
cognates and interlingual homographs: Effects of code simi-
larity in generalized lexical decision.
Martensen, H., Maris, E. & Dijkstra, A. (Ton) (2000). When does
inconsistency hurt? On the relation between phonological-consistency effects and the reliability of sublexical units.
Memory & Cognition , 28, 648±656.
Page, M. (2000). Connectionist modeling in psychology: A localist
manifesto. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 23, 443±512.
Rodrigues-Fornells, A., Rotte, M., Heinze, H.-J., No Èsselt, T. &
MuÈnte, T. (2002). Brain potential and functional MRI evi-
dence for how to handle two languages with one brain.Nature , 415, 1026±1029.
Roelofs, A. (in press). Shared phonological encoding processes and
representations of languages in bilingual speakers. Language
and Cognitive Processes .
Roelofs, A. & Hagoort, P. (submitted). Control of language use:
Cognitive modeling the hemodynamics of Stroop task per-
formance.
Schulpen, B., Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Schriefers, H. J. (in prepara-
tion). A cross-sectional study on the development of automa-
tization and cognitive control in Dutch-English bilinguals:
Part 1. [working title]
Van Heuven, W. J. B. (2000). Visual word recognition in mono-
lingual and bilingual readers: Experiments and computational
modeling. Ph.D. thesis, University of Nijmegen. (NICITechnical Report 20-01.)
Van Heuven, W. J. B., Dijkstra, A. (Ton) & Grainger, J. (1998).
Orthographic neighborhood effects in bilingual word recog-
nition. Journal of Memory and Language , 39, 458±483.
Van Wijnendaele, I. & Brysbaert, M. (2002). Visual word recog-
nition in bilinguals: Phonological priming from the second to
the ®rst language. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance , 3, 619±627.
Ziegler, J. C. & Perry, C. (1998). No more problems in Coltheart's
neighborhood: Resolving neighborhood con¯icts in the lexical
decision task. Cognition , 68, B53±B62.224 Ton Dijkstra and Walter J. B. van Heuven