Sensor Monitoring in the Home: Giving Voice to 
Elderly People 
 
Marije Kanis, Saskia Robben, Judith Hagen, Anne Bimmerman, Natasja Wagelaar & Ben Kröse 
Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
m.kanis@hva.nl 
 
 
Abstract —This paper describes the approach used to identify 
elderly people’s needs and attitudes towards applying ambient 
sensor systems for monitoring daily activities in the home. As 
elderly are typically unfamiliar with such ambient technology, 
interactive tools for explicating sensor monitoring –an interactive dollhouse and iPad applications for displaying live monitored 
sensor activity data– were developed and used for this study. 
Furthermore, four studies conducted by occupational therapists 
with more than 60 elderly particip ants –including questionnaires 
(n=41), interviews (n=6), user sessions (n=14) and field studies 
(n=2)– were conducted. The exp eriences from these studies 
suggest that this approach helped to democratically engage the 
elderly as end-user and identify acceptance issues. 
Elderly-centred design; Ambient Assisted Living; Occupational 
therapists; Sensor monitoring; Sensor displays 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
With the growing awareness of the importance of engaging 
users in the design of technology, there is an increasing 
recognition that older people should also be involved in the 
design and evaluation of technology that could assist them in 
living their life longer independently. However, engaging 
elderly by researchers and technologists is not typically a 
straightforward process. For ex ample, the technical design and 
developing party may have potential biases towards using particular technology, have difficulties explaining their 
technical ideas and not be familiar with dealing with potential 
cognitive and physical limitations of elderly users. Such issues 
can hinder the needed shared understanding of the parties 
involved. To address this, this paper describes a different 
approach that includes studies conducted by occupational 
therapists and visual displays to help older people 
democratically identify and describe the acceptance issues that 
they encounter with monitoring technology. 
A. Residential Monitoring 
The demographic change of aging populations in developed 
countries has motivated a large body of research to specifically 
focus on technologies that are target ed at elderly people. In this 
vein, the field of Ambient A ssisted Living (AAL) focuses on 
ambient technologies to support and help elderly live longer 
independently. Ambient sensor monitoring is particularly being 
explored for this purpose. Typically, it is focused on the 
residential monitoring of elderly Activities of Daily Living (ADL); a set of activities used by physicians to benchmark 
physical and cognitive decline. The use of sensor monitoring 
technology in independent living settings is promising, as it 
could support earlier detection of changes in daily activity 
patterns, like reduced activity in an elder’s home and so alert 
health care providers to intervene earlier. However, according 
to a literature review [1], more work focusing on understanding 
the needs from the perspective of the elderly is needed. 
Particularly, technology that removes control from the elderly 
user can undermine the purpose by not letting them function 
independently [2]. For example, in the case of ambient sensor 
technology, independence is not achieved by, and may even be 
undermined by, providing feedback about an individual’s status 
to someone else, such as in a sensor report about functioning 
sent to caregivers instead of reporting to the elderly individual . 
B. Occupational Therapists for Engaging Older Adults 
Mitzner and Rogers [3] state that by involving older adults 
in the design process, technologies can be developed that are 
more useful and usable for older adults and may, therefore, 
increase their acceptance rates and contribute to successful 
aging. However, democratic inclusion of older adults has been 
recognized as challenging and needing a different approach [4]. 
Involving occupational therapists in such processes could help 
to increase common understanding between the elderly and 
other parties. Although collaborations between technologists, 
and even practitioners in the field of Human Computer 
Interaction (HCI) and occupationa l therapists are not standard 
practice, these latter groups both share the basis that the needs 
of a human being are central in their activities. Occupational 
therapy is generally applied to aid individuals in recovering and 
regaining as much independence as  possible and so is also used 
to address problems that develop as a result of getting older. An 
occupational therapist can assess one’s ability to carry out 
everyday tasks, such as washing, cooking or dressing oneself, 
and offer advice or techniques to help with these activities. 
Therefore, occupational therapists can typically help to 
democratically assess acceptance issues when regarding a 
sensor system for monitoring elderly people’s daily activities.  
C. Displaying Ambient Concepts for Engaging Older Adults
 
Another problem with explor ing ambient design concepts 
with elderly is adequately explaining the scope of the 
technologies involved. Resear chers [5] found that showing 
simple mappings between sensors and display in demonstration applications in an ambient-technology augmented kitchen 
This work is part of the research programs Health-lab, COMMIT and 
Smart Systems for Smart Services that has been supported by SIA. We 
acknowledge Waag Society and Vivium Naarderheem for their contributions 
to this work.  WK,QWHUQDWLRQDO&RQIHUHQFHRQ3HUYDVLYH&RPSXWLQJ7HFKQR ORJLHVIRU+HDOWKFDUHDQG:RUNVKRSV
k,&67
'2,LFVWSHUYDVLYHKHDOWK could greatly improve users' understanding of the potential 
functionality. In this line, this study explores the involvement 
of occupational therapists, and also the use of interactive visual 
tools to help to articulate and understand ambient monitoring 
technology from an elderly point of view.  
Several projects attempt to help elders maintain their 
independence. For example, the CareNet Display [6] is used for 
reassuring the care network around an elder in the home. 
However, directly targeting elderly people as end-users of 
ambient system displays in the home is not standard practice. 
Research that also targeted the elderly [7] found that elder study participants had more difficulties with interpreting and 
interacting with a sensor activity display. Such work 
demonstrates the need for studies and displays that address the 
elderly as end-user in ways that they can understand. 
II. S
TUDY APPROACH  
Different approaches were taken to assess the needs and 
attitudes of elderly people with regards to monitoring their 
daily activities with sensors in their homes. The initial Living 
Lab context concerning this st udy is on-going work, involving 
the set-up of the needed infrastructure to conduct the studies, 
including the making of the necessarily social, organizational 
and technical connections. Then, the primary stage of this 
particular study comprised the development of several interactive visual tools for explaining ambient monitoring and 
sensor data activity to elderly. In the secondary stage, these 
tools were used in several studies by occupational therapists to 
democratically assess issues with elderly that concerned the use 
of sensor monitoring. This study lasted for more than one year. 
A. Living Labs for Health Innovation 
A large part of this work was carried out in a Living Lab 
setting, an environment and infras tructure where real users can 
be exposed to applications in their daily life so to aid designers 
and developers improve their products. The Living Lab concept 
was originally coined by Mitchell at MIT, as an approach for 
sensing, prototyping, validating and refining complex solutions 
in evolving real life contexts. In The Netherlands, several Living Lab locations have been set-up as part of Health-lab , a 
program that focuses on innovative solutions for enabling 
people to live longer independently. In this program, people 
from diverse care institutions, research labs, educational 
institutes and companies closely work together with end-users to co-create (technical) soluti ons. The program’s first Living 
Lab for health innovation was Nursing home Naarderheem, and originally set in motion in 2006. The current Living Lab setting 
involves apartments in different locations that were eventually equipped as AAL environments in which sensor-monitoring 
systems have been installed (see Fig 1).  
B. Tools to Exemplify Ambient Monitoring 
For democratically engaging the elderly as end-user, 
interactive tools were developed to demonstrate and explain the 
workings of the proposed monitoring system and the sensor 
activity output (see Fig. 2). Namely, an interactive dollhouse 
and iPad applications displaying live monitored sensor activity 
data were developed that target the elderly user. 
 
Figure 2.  Interactive tools for exemplifying sensor monitoring: iPad 
application and first version of the interactive dollhouse (with visible sensors) 
1) Interactive dollhouse 
Sensor-equipped dollhouses were developed for increasing 
people’s understanding of the existence and desired workings 
of ambient monitoring technology in the home by 
demonstrating its potential (see also [8]). The dollhouses, scale
models of the different sensor-equipped homes, were 
developed and used to engage elderly users in residential 
monitoring. The scale models have been equipped with simple 
sensors that are able to track movement and so simulate the actual monitoring environment. The models were used as an 
elderly-centered research and design method in different settings for increasing understandi ng of the desired workings of 
ambient monitoring in the home.  
Figure 3.  The interactive dollhouse (latest version with hidden, embedded 
sensor technology and direct display) 
 Figure 1.  Sensors installed in the homes of the elderly participants 
 
 
Figure 4.  Screenshots of the five different developed elderly-centred applications for visualizing sensor activity
2) Elderly-centered apps for demonstrating sensor activity 
As part of a third-year stude nt assignment, 25 students (in 
groups of five) from the university’s program on 
Communication and Multimedia Design (CMD) were given the 
assignment to develop an iPad application that displays 
ambient sensor activity data in relevant and meaningful ways to 
senior users. In the design of these products, elderly ( n=34) 
were actively engaged in the design of these products (and recruited by the students themselves), in order to contribute to 
the success and acceptance of such technology. This led to five elderly-centered apps (see Fig. 4), which were all able to show 
the sensor activity data, but differed in (additional) features 
(such as a weather forecast) and user interface. Another student 
from a Technical Informatics course got then involved in linking the developed apps with the actual ambient monitoring 
systems in the Living Lab environment in Naarderheem.  
Graduate students in occupational therapy continued with more 
in-depth studies concerning elder’s attitudes with regards to 
residential monitoring and also evaluated the resulting five 
apps with elderly users.  
III. S
TUDIES BY OCCUPATIONAL THERAPISTS  
Four studies were conducted by occupational therapists 
under supervision of experts in HCI and sensor monitoring for 
assessing elderly people’s attitudes and needs with regards to 
sensor monitoring systems. These were the following: 
1) Questionnaires for assessing overall views on sensor 
monitoring, data sharing needs and developed apps:  A 
questionnaire was given to elderly living in residential homes 
in the Dutch regions West-Friesland and Lelystad to gather 
views on applying sensor monitoring and the developed apps. The recruited respondents were unfamiliar with residential 
monitoring at first instance. The questionnaire explained the 
concept of sensor monitoring with a photo scenario and 
screenshots for each of the five apps were shown.  
2) Interviews for exploring attitudes towards applying 
sensor monitoring, using the interactive dollhouse:  To gain a 
deeper understanding of applying sensor monitoring, semi-structured interviews were held in the homes of the elderly 
participants who were recruite d from the first study. Similar 
subjects as in the questionnaire were discussed, but this time the interactive dollhouse with sensors was used for better 
explaining and engaging the participants in the proposed 
monitoring technology. 
 3) User study sessions to evaluate the developed apps:  For 
determining the use and usability of the five apps, four user 
group sessions (including 3-4 partic ipants in each session) were 
conducted. During each session, all the five apps were actively 
tried, discussed, and compared. The sessions started with an 
initial introduction led by the occupational therapists, then 
participants were subsequently asked to “think aloud” when 
progressing through the given usage tasks. After using all the 
apps, they had to pick their favorite.  
4) Pilot field study for testing the use of the most favored 
app in real settings:  For testing the use and experience with 
the app in a real (living lab) situation in Naarderheem, two 
elders that have sensors installed in their homes used the most 
favored app for one week. Thus, the app was connected to their own sensor network so they could view their own sensor 
activity data. After that week, a semi-structured interview was 
held to gain insights in to their experience.  
IV. S
TUDY FINDINGS  
The results of the studies –(1) questionnaire; (2) interviews; 
(3) user study; and (4) field study– present multifaceted 
insights in acceptance aspects of ambient sensor monitoring. 
1) The questionnaire:  This study led to 41 respondents 
between 65 and 89 years of age. The occupational therapists 
selected and recruited the participants, obtained the necessary 
consent, and offered door-to-door assistance with filling in the 
questionnaire. Still, not all of the participants were able to 
answer every single question of  the extensive questionnaire. 
Interestingly, the majority of the questionnaire respondents 
expressed not to want to use se nsor monitoring at this moment 
in time (92%, n=38). Also, before the explanation provided by 
the questionnaire and therapists, the majority of the 
participants indicated to not understand the concept of sensor 
monitoring (65%, n=40). Interestingly, from the eight 
participants who had indicated to understand the concept of sensor monitoring, two participants still thought it concerned the use of cameras, something that is not the case. When 
participants were positive about sharing the monitored activity 
data with others, and were asked to differentiate between several parties –home care, fa mily, friends, neighbors or 
technical experts– home care ranked first and neighbors came 
out as least favorite to share their data with. 
2) Semi-structured interviews:  The interviews were held in 
the homes of six elders (and four of their partners) which had a mean age of 77 years ( SD=7,3). The results show that the 
majority of participants (83%) were positive with regards to applying sensor monitoring now or  in the future. This more 
positive outcome than in the first study could be because a 
more explanatory method was used. According to the 
participants, the dollhouse, which was used during the 
interviews, gave more clarity into sensor monitoring. During the interviews, more profound arguments were brought up whether to use sensor monitoring. Positive arguments were an 
improved sense of security and independence. As one 
participant noted: “It is rea ssuring to know that there is 
someone watching over you”. Negative brought up arguments 
were the potential costs involved and breach of privacy.  
3) User study:  From the fourteen user study participants, 
one participant was not able to finish the session, because of fatigue. Such physical limita tions are common when doing 
studies with elderly people [9]. Also holding the iPad or touch 
interactions with the device seemed strenuous for some. In 
using the tablet interface, the participants revealed a lot of 
variations in skills. Findings, that also Van der Geest [9] found 
when conducting Internet user studies with elders. The participants expressed a preference for simple applications with clear wordings and a mini mal amount of screens, as in 
the one chosen most favorite, shown at the bottom of the middle in Fig. 4. For the fina l field study, the most favored 
working app was adjusted for usage in a real situation.  
4) Field study:  For this final study, a small sample was 
recruited ( n=2), because of the diffi culty of obtaining willing 
elderly participants living in homes with sensor networks 
already installed. The two par ticipants, who used the sensor 
activity app in combination with their sensor network in their 
homes, both checked the app several times a day, suggesting an interest in their own data. Participants indicated to be 
mostly interested in seeing their data over a longer period of time and so witness potential  decline. Moreover, the 
participants indicated to appreciate to be able to have their say 
over their own sensor data. 
V. D
ISCUSSION  
Further investigations with a larger sample size to study 
sensor technology usage with elders in real settings are 
recommended. This, however, comes with many technical, 
social and practical challenges. For example, getting to the 
stage in which elderly people are willing to have sensor networks installed in their homes  is quite an undertaking. And 
when these are in place, elderly participants frequently become 
ill, may pull out of study or other unexpected things can 
happen, such as participants switching off systems to save 
electricity. Furthermore, as this research and others [9] found, older age often coincides with (more) physical and cognitive 
limitations, such as becoming hard of hearing, or having 
difficulty memorizing new material making it harder to directly 
include elderly in technology usage, study and development. 
For this purpose, the collaboration with occupational therapists 
during the study was beneficial in many ways, such as in the 
participant recruitment process. Also in the interactions and 
dealings with participants, and carrying out the studies with the 
elderly without a technology bias, this was very valuable. 
Although interdisciplinary studies, particular within the field of 
pervasive health are not uncommon, further exploring the 
relationship between occupational therapists, technologists and 
HCI researchers deserves attention. The studies conducted by 
occupational therapists offered an insight into the priorities and 
perspectives of the individuals, and particularly the elderly 
participants involved. The studies showed that engaging, 
explaining and letting the elders experience monitoring by 
using visual tools such as dollhouses and the apps visualizing 
sensor activity helped the elderly in a better and more 
democratic discussion of the technology. This can be 
considered necessary, as the study results indicate that the 
majority of the study participants were not positive and did not 
understand or want to engage in the sensor monitoring of daily 
activities at first instance. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT  
We thank the participants & students involved in the study. 
REFERENCES  
[1] H. B.-L. Duh, E. Y.-L. Do, M. Billi nghurst, F. Quek, and V. H.-H. Chen, 
"Senior-friendly technologies: Interaction design for senior users," in 
Extended abstracts of CHI 2010 Atlanta, Georgia, USA: ACM, 2010. 
[2] S. Thielke, M. Harniss, H. Thomps on, S. Patel, G. Demiris, and K. 
Johnson, "Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs and the adoption of health-related technologies for older adults," Ageing international, vol. 
37, pp. 470-488, 2011. 
[3] T. Mitzner and W. Rogers, "Understanding older adults’ limitations and 
capabilities, and involving them in the design process," in Extended 
abstracts of CHI'10, 2010. 
[4] A. Dickinson, J. Arnott, and S. Prior, "Methods for human computer 
interaction research with older people," Behaviour & Information 
Technology, vol. 26, pp. 343-352, 2007. 
[5] P. Olivier, A. Monk, G. Xu, and J. Hoey, "Ambient Kitchen: Designing 
situated services using a high fidelity prototyping environment," in 
Proceedings of PETRA'09, Corfu, Greece, 2009. 
[6] S. Consolvo, P. Roessler, B. Shelton, A. Lamarca, B. Schilit, and S. Bly, "Technology for Care Networks of Elders," IEEE Pervasive Computing, 
vol. 3, pp. 22-29, 2004. 
[7] G. Alexander, B. Wakefield, M. Rantz,  M. Skubic, M. Aud, S. Erdelez, 
and S. Ghenaimi, "Passive sensor technology interface to assess elder activity in lndependent living," Journal of Nursing Research, vol. 60, pp. 
318-325, 2011. 
[8] M. Kanis, S. Robben, and B. Kröse, "Miniature play: Using an 
interactive dollhouse to demonstrate ambient interactions in the home," 
in Proceedings of DIS 2012, Newcastle, UK, 2012. 
[9] T. v. d. Geest, "Conducting usability studies with users who are elderly 
or have disabilities," Technical Communication, vol. 53, 2006. 
 
