See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/3089069
Sinewa ve ﬁt algorithm based on total least-squares method with application to
ADC effective bits measu rement
Article    in  IEEE T ransactions on Instrument ation and Me asur ement  · Sept ember 1997
DOI: 10.1109/19.650821  · Sour ce: IEEE Xplor e
CITATIONS
48READS
2,803
4 author s, including:
Jian Qiu Zhang
Fudan Univ ersity
144 PUBLICA TIONS    1,548  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Sun Jinw ei
Tsinghua Univ ersity
4 PUBLICA TIONS    69 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Jian Qiu Zhang  on 05 Dec ember 2014.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.1026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 46, NO. 4, AUGUST 1997
Sinewave Fit Algorithm Based on Total
Least-Squares Method with Application
to ADC Effective Bits Measurement
Jian Qiu Zhang, Zhao Xinmin, Hu Xiao, and Sun Jinwei
Abstract— Sinewave ﬁt is a fundamental task in many test and
measurement systems. The characterizations of analog–digitalconverters and digital oscilloscopes are two examples. In thispaper, we present a high-performance (i.e., high-precision andhigh-speed) algorithm to estimate the four parameters of a
sinewave from a sample data record. By the use of trigonometric
identity, we propose a frequency estimator that turns the non-linear estimation problem into a linear one. Thus, the difﬁcultyof the traditional nonlinear least-squares sinewave ﬁt method isattenuated. The total least-squares method is used to estimatefourparametersofasinewaveinordertominimizetheestimationerrors in the sense of
/108 /50norm. Simulation results exhibit that
the proposed method gives superior performance over traditionalones and achieves excellent estimation of the true resolution ofthe simulated ideal ADC. This new algorithm is noniterative andgives swift and consistent results.
I. INTRODUCTION
SINE-FIT routines are used extensively during the char-
acterization of analog-to-digital converters (ADC’s) and
digitaloscilloscopes[1]–[4].Thesesine-ﬁtalgorithmsestimate
the four parameters (amplitude, frequency, phase, and offset)
of the sinewave that best ﬁts a given ﬁnite length recordof discrete samples, which are assumed to be samples of asinewave, possibly corrupted by noise and distortion. These
approaches are basically a gradient search method which op-
erates iteratively. Two common problems which this iterativeapproach has are that the convergence is not guaranteed andthat the results from different runs may not be consistent due
to possible trapping at a local minimum. If one wishes to
guarantee the convergence by choosing a small step size inthe iteration, experience indicates that it usually takes a longtime to converge [6].
In order to reduce these difﬁculties, Jenq et al. proposed a
method which used the weighted least-square and windowingtechnique to estimate sinewave parameters in [5]–[6]. Toimplement their method in a real life situation is, how-
ever, problematic because it is difﬁcult how to maintain the
monotonicity of the
(where
are sampling data of a sinewave. More details
aboutthisequationcanbefoundin[5]).Inthesimulatedmode,
oneknowspreciselythefourparametersoftheinputsinewave;
while in practice one has only the “digitized sinewave record”
Manuscript received June 3, 1996. This work was supported by the Chinese
Natural Science Fund under Grant 59577019.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Harbin, China.
Publisher Item Identiﬁer S 0018-9456(97)06510-8.and does not know at which quadrant of the sinewave these
data are located due to and
. Especially, one
is unaware at which quadrant of the sinwave the originalsampling point
of the digitized sinewave record is
located.
Inviewofthesedifﬁcultiesandproblems,weproposeanew
method, which is based on the trigonometric identity of sam-pling data of a sinewave function and the total least-squares
method, to estimate the four parameters of a sinewave. First,
the algorithm presented in this paper attenuates the difﬁcultiesof traditional nonlinear least-squares sine-ﬁt algorithm aboutfrequency estimation. Next, the proposed algorithm is optimal
in the sense of
norm because using total least-squares (TLS)
are used to estimate four parameters of the sinewave.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the princi-
pleoftheTLSisbrieﬂyreviewed.Thederivationofestimation
algorithmofafourparameterssinewaveisgiveninSection III.
Simulation results and comparison between proposed andtraditional algorithm are discussed in Section IV. Section Vconcludes the report.
II. T
HETOTALLEASTSQUARESMETHOD
In this section we will brieﬂy review the principle of TLS
method. Major results will be stated without proofs. Moredetails about this method can be found in [7]–[9].
Given an overdetermined set of
linear equation in
unknowns
(1)
A good way to motivate the TLS method is to formulate
the ordinary least-squares (LS) problem as follows. The LSproblem involves ﬁnding a solution vector
such that
minimum (2)
and
range
whereis avector which represents the observation noise
record; is the norm given by
(3)
0018–9456/97$10.00 1997 IEEEZHANG et al.: ALGORITHM BASED ON TOTAL LEAST-SQUARES METHOD 1027
Thus, the LS problem amounts to perturbing the observation
by a minimum amount so that can be estimated by
and under minimum norm.
Now, simply put, the idea behind TLS is to consider
perturbation of both and, i.e.,
(4)
or (4) can be put into the following form:
or
(5)
where
The TLS solution to the above homogeneous equation (5)
can be formulated as seeking a solution vector such that
minimum (6)
and
range
where denotes the Frobenius norm given by
(7)
The TLS method minimizes the noise perturbation of effect
from both and. Equation (5) shows that the TLS problem
involves ﬁnding a perturbation matrix having
the minimum norm so that is rank deﬁcient. The
singular value decomposition (SVD) can be used for thispurpose. The solution to (5) is obtained from a right singularvector
corresponding to the smallest singular value of the
concatenated matrix . The TLS estimate is [7]–[9]
...
provided (8)
where are elements of the th singular vec-
tor. For methods of picking a total least-squares solution when
the smallest singular value is repeated or when is
zero,thereaderisreferredto[8].Since isnoterror-free,
thetotalleast-squaressolutionispreferabletotheleast-squaressolution.
In Fig. 1, the LS and the TLS measures of goodness of
ﬁt are shown for a simple case when
. In the LS
problem, it is the vertical distances that are important, whereasin the TLS problem, it is the perpendicular distances that are
critical. So from this geometric interpretation, it follows that
the TLS method is better than the LS method with respect tothe residual error in the curve ﬁtting.
Fig. 1. Least-squared versus total squares.
III. THEESTIMATION ALGORITHM
OF THESINEWAVE PARAMETERS
Suppose a sine function is
sampled at equal interval , then the sampled data can
be written as
(9)
where is the digital frequency corresponding to
is the additive noise due to the sampling process (which
includes the quantization noise of ADC’s).
A. The Sine-Wave Frequency Estimator
According to (9), we deﬁne
(10)
where denotes “deﬁnition.” By means of trigonometric
identity, we can deduce
(11)
When (10) is substituted into (11), we get
(12)
and
(13)
Equation (13) minus (12) is
(14)
In (14) let respectively, we can formulate
overdetermined equation as (1) where
(for transpose)1028 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 46, NO. 4, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 2. The percentage errors of offset, amplitude, phase, and frequency estimation, of the new algorithm.
Obviously, when are replaced by
sampling data
which from (10), both andare perturbed by noise .
Thus, the total least-squares method, which is discussed inSection II, can be utilized to obtain the optimal estimation
of vector in the sense of norm. Once has been
estimated from (8), the estimation of sinewave frequency
can be written as1
(15)
B. Amplitude, Phase, and Offset Estimator
When the frequency is replaced by the estimation ,
and let in (9), we can also formulate the
1When the sampling rate is higher than Nyquist rate, the estimation result
of frequency is unique.overdetermined equation as follows:
............(16)
Similar to the frequency estimator discussed above, both
andin (16) are perturbed by noise. Again, the TLS method
can be used to solve (16). Consequently, we can obtain the
estimation of vector . Finally, the amplitude, phase, and
offset estimation can be obtained, respectively, as follows:
(17)
whereZHANG et al.: ALGORITHM BASED ON TOTAL LEAST-SQUARES METHOD 1029
IV. COMPUTER SIMULATION
Consider an example whose digitizer output is
(18)
where
simulated digitizer input;
simulated harmonic distor-
tion;
simulated offset;
simulated normal random noise;
simulated quantization error.
A. Sinewave Fit
The digitizer has eight bits. The sinewave frequency is
nearly one-third of the sampling rate of the digitizer. The totaldata points used are 100. The operation of quantizing was to
roundthesumof
and tothenearestinteger.
In simulation, the four situations are considered as follows:
1) . Fifty esti-
mations are performed with of the input sinewave
uniformly distributed on, , then the curves of
percentage errors of four parameters estimation of
andare shown in Fig. 2. and the percentage error is
deﬁned as
percentage error % (19)
whereis the no error parameter, is the estimation of
.inFig. 2denotescurvesofthepercentageerrors
of phase, offset, amplitude and frequency respectivelyin this situation.
2)
,thatis,thereisharmonic
distortion in the digitizer data records. in Fig. 2
denotes the percentage errors curves of phase, offset,amplitude, and frequency, respectively, in this situation.
3)
, that is, digitizer data
records are perturbed by random noise of the
Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and variance 0.01,which are produced by means of Monte Carlo method.
In this situation the percentage errors curves of phase,
offset, amplitude, and frequency, which are denoted as
, respectively, are shown in Fig. 2.
4) In (18) all the interference has been considered. In
this situation, denotes the percentage errors of
phase, offset, amplitude, and frequency estimation, re-spectively, in Fig. 2.
B. Comparison Between TLS and Traditional Methods [1]
Making use of the same digitizing data record, we compare
the performance between algorithm proposed in this paperand the traditional one in [1]. The speciﬁed comparisonenvironment is
in (18); in addition, the traditional algorithm
hasarequirementforareasonablyaccurateinitialguessforthesoughtparameters.ThecomparisonresultshavebeenshowninTABLE I
COMPARATIVE RESULTSBETWEEN THE TLS M ETHOD AND TRADITIONAL METHOD
TABLE II
SIMULATED AND IDEALEFFECTIVE BITS
Table I. From Table I one can ﬁnd that the estimation errors of
the frequency, phase and amplitude of the algorithm describedin this paper are at least 10
less than those of the algorithm
in [1], whereas the estimation errors of the offset is a little
better than one of the algorithm in [1]. Furthermore, because
this new algorithm is noniterative, it gives consistent resultsfor various runs. It is also swift: for a 203-point data record, itonly takes a couple of seconds to estimate the four parameters
of a sinewave, whereas the traditional one [1] needs to take
1.5 h to obtain the results in Table I.
C. ADC Effective Bits Measurement
Acommonlyusedformulaforan
-bitADCisgivenby[2]
(20)
If one assumes that the quantization noise is uniformly dis-
tribution and that the quantization errors from sample tosample are statistically independent, then,
,
where is the ideal code bin width. We use the sinewave
ﬁt algorithm described in this paper to estimate the four
parameters of the input sinewave, and then use the estimated
sinewave as if it were the actual sinewave to compute theeffective bits of the ADC by using (20). The critical questionis “How good is it?” A simulation to implement this proposal
has been done. The results are shown in Table II. It is seen
that this approach gives excellent results with resolution notless than three bits.1030 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 46, NO. 4, AUGUST 1997
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a high-performance
sinewave parameters estimation algorithm, which gives highly
accurate and speedy estimations. The total least-squaresmethod is utilized to estimate the four parameters of asinewave in order to make the estimation errors be minimized
in the sense of
norm. Simulation results exhibit that the
proposed method gives superior performance over traditionalones and produces excellent estimation of the true resolutionof the simulated ideal ADC.
R
EFERENCES
[1] “IEEE trial-use standard for digitizing wave-form recorders,” IEEE Std.
1057, July 1989.
[2] B. E. Peetz, “Dynamic testing of wave-form recorder,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas. , vol. IM-32, pp. 12–17, Mar. 1983.
[3] J. Kuffel, T. R. McComb, and R. Malewski, “Comparative evaluation
of computer methods for calculating the best-ﬁt sinusoid to the digital
record of a high-purity sine wave,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. , vol.
IM-36, pp. 418–422, June 1987.
[4] T. R. Mccomb, J. Kuffel,and B. C. Le Roux, “Acomparative evaluation
of some practical algorithm used in the effective bits test of wave-form
record,”IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. , vol. 38, pp. 37–42, Feb. 1989.
[5] Y. C. Jenq, “High-precision sinusoidal frequency estimator based on
weightedleast-square method,” IEEETrans.Instrum.Meas. , vol.IM-36,
pp. 124–127, Mar. 1987.
[6] Y. C. Jenq and P. B. Crosby, “Sinewave parameter estimation algorithm
with application to wave-form digitizer effective bits measurement,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. , vol. 37, pp. 529–532, Dec. 1988.
[7] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, “An analysis of the total least-squares
problem,” SIAM J. Numer. Anal. , vol. 17, pp. 883–893, Dec. 1980.
[8] S. Van Huffel and J. Vandewalle, “Analysis and solution of the non-
generic total least-squares problem,” SIAM J. Numer. Anal. , vol. 9, pp.
360–372, July 1988.
[9] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computation , Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopins Univ. Press, 1989.Jian Qiu Zhang for a photograph and biography, see this issue, p. 940.
Zhao Xinmin for a photograph and biography, see this issue, p. 940.
Hu Xiao was born in Sichuan, China, in 1972. She received the B.S.
degree in electrical engineering from the Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 1994 and the M.S. degree in electrical
engineering from the Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 1996.
She is now an Engineer at the Shenzhen Huawei Tech. Co., Ltd. Her
research interests are communication testing systems and digital signal pro-
cessing and its application in measurement.
Sun Jinwei was born was born in Harbin, China,
in 1964. He received the B.S. degree and the M.S.
degrees from the Harbin Institute of Technology(HIT) in electrical engineering, in 1987 and 1990,
respectively.
Currently, he is a Lecturer in the Department
of Electrical Engineering, HIT. He is interested in
sensor information fusion, ADC testing, DSP, and
artiﬁcial intelligence in electrical instrumentation.
View publication stats