International  Journal  of 
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Article
An Agile Digital Platform to Support Population
Health—A Case Study of a Digital Platform to Support Patients
with Delirium Using IoT, NLP , and AI
Mohan R. Tanniru1,*, Nimit Agarwal2, Amanda Sokan1and Salim Hariri3
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Tanniru, M.R.; Agarwal, N.;
Sokan, A.; Hariri, S. An Agile Digital
Platform to Support Population
Health—A Case Study of a Digital
Platform to Support Patients with
Delirium Using IoT, NLP , and AI. Int.
J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18,
5686. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph18115686
Academic Editor: Paul B. Tchounwou
Received: 7 April 2021
Accepted: 21 May 2021
Published: 26 May 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of Public Health, University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA;
aesokan@arizona.edu
2Department of Internal Medicine, Banner University Medical Center, University of Arizona,
Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA; NimitAgarwal@arizona.edu or Nimit.Agarwal@bannerhealth.com
3College of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA;
hariri@arizona.edu
*Correspondence: mtanniru@arizona.edu
Abstract: For an organization to be customer centric and service oriented requires that it use each
encounter with a customer to create value, leverage advanced technologies to design digital services
to fulﬁll the value, and assess perceived value-in-use to continue to revise the value as customer
expectations evolve. The adaptation of value cycles to address the rapid changes in customer
expectations requires agile digital platforms with dynamic software ecosystems interacting with
multiple actors. For public health agencies focused on population health, these agile digital platforms
should provide tailored care to address the distinct needs of select population groups. Using prior
research on aging and dynamic software ecosystems, this paper develops a template for the design
of an agile digital platform to support value cycle activities among clinical and non-clinical actors,
including population groups. It illustrates the design of an agile digital platform to support clients
that suffer from delirium, using digital services that leverage Internet of Things, natural language
processing, and AI that uses real-time data for learning and care adaption. We conclude the paper
with directions for future research.
Keywords: population health; value cycles; digital health; dynamic software ecosystems; delirium
patient care; agile digital platform
1. Introduction
Businesses have recognized the importance of understanding the customer journey
and reacting quickly to address customers’ changing expectations in an evolving technology
landscape [ 1]. Such a customer-centric and service orientation means businesses have to
use each encounter with a customer or service exchange to create value propositions and
assess their perceived value-in-use or value-in-context to revise these value propositions
as the customer expectations change [ 2]. By using such a value lens to create, fulﬁll, and
assess value-in-use, often using digital services (i.e., services that create value supported
by advanced technologies), businesses can create differentiated value in a competitive
marketplace. More importantly, such a market dynamic calls on businesses to use agile
organizational models to innovate and explore new value propositions [ 3]. Depending on
the customer value cycle (time between two purchases of the same product/service) and
product life cycle (time to create a new product/service to fulﬁll value), this also means
that businesses may need to use multiple value cycles to keep customers engaged and
empowered [4].
This market dynamic is blurring the difference between business and IT strategies. In
fact, it is interweaving or fusing these two strategies under the framework of the digital
business strategy [ 5], depending on where value is created (e.g., productivity within the
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18115686 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerphInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 2 of 22
business or value creation to support customer needs). When value creation is driven by
the changes in customers’ needs, the digital business strategy has to develop innovative
digital services that create, fulﬁll, and assess value-in-use. Analyzing feedback to improve
clinical diagnosis (i.e., clinical informatics), business performance (i.e., business analytics),
or system performance (i.e., analytics in general) is necessary when there are changes in the
inputs, or models used to process these inputs. When such changes are driven by evolving
needs of the external consumer, feedback to improve value created by an organization
comes from a consumer’s perception of such value (value-in-use).
Independent of where the feedback comes from, a software ecosystem designed to
improve performance has to be agile to support the faster design of these new digital
services, or the reconﬁguration and/or redesign of the current digital services to meet
evolving customer expectations. Just as businesses are leveraging multiple partners to
fulﬁll value, today’s software ecosystems also have to leverage the expertise and resources
of multiple software developers and technology partners as they design digital services to
create and fulﬁll value [ 6]. In fact, the digital platforms used to support the communication
of information and the coordination of value cycle activities across business and customer
ecosystems need an agile software ecosystem that leverages a mix of technologies and
application environments (e.g., mobile apps, web browsers, IoT sensors, cloud base services,
etc.) to create and sustain value [7].
Designing an agile digital platform to address customer needs is an even bigger
challenge for healthcare organizations such as hospitals. In a business ecosystem, value
cycles that leverage external partners are often under the control and coordination of the
business. The business can therefore direct value creation and value fulﬁllment, and it has
some inﬂuence on gathering feedback on value-in-use. However, health systems, even
if they are inherently service driven, must operate two different value cycles. The ﬁrst
value cycle is within a provider ecosystem (e.g., hospital) where the initial value is created
(e.g., a health condition diagnosis) and some value is fulﬁlled (e.g., testing of patients and
treatment plan design when they are in-patients). The second and often much longer value
cycle is within the patient ecosystem (e.g., a patient’s home or at a temporary facility such as
a skilled nursing or rehab facility). The value fulﬁllment, value-in-use tracking for feedback,
and even new value creation (e.g., changes to treatment plans) are supported by multiple
external clinical and non-clinical partners, including patients and health care providers.
While digital platforms used to support the ﬁrst value cycle can be designed for agility with
healthcare provider oversight, even when they use several external software partners [ 8],
building an agile digital platform for the second value cycle is much more complex.
With increased access to technologies such as wearables and mobile apps to monitor
health conditions and track physical activities, and with the growing use of telehealth,
portals and social media tools to seek and share information, the patient demand for digital
services to create and fulﬁll value in healthcare is growing. At the same time, healthcare
providers are looking to use patient interest in self-managing their care at home to shift
a signiﬁcant part of the value fulﬁllment and successive value cycles into the patient
ecosystem to reduce readmission costs and improve patient satisfaction. For public health
agencies with a focus on prevention, most of the value cycle activities to tailor practices to
create value, fulﬁll value, and assess value-in-use have to be done within the population
or patient ecosystem using a number of external actors, both clinical and non-clinical.
Hence, the following research question: How can we build an agile digital platform to
support health care delivery in a client ecosystem? The client here refers to both the patients
seeking care transition services and the population groups looking to adhere to preventive
healthcare practices.
We will try to answer this question in the paper using the following three steps:
(1) design innovative care delivery models that create value for a speciﬁc client population;
(2) develop an agile digital platform that uses conﬁgurable digital services to communicate
information and coordinate activities in support of value cycle activities; and (3) illustrate
how such an agile digital platform using artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and Internet of ThingsInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 3 of 22
(IoT) technologies can be developed to support a particular client group, being patients
who suffer with delirium conditions in this case. The paper is organized as follows to
discuss each of these three steps:
Section 2 focuses on the ﬁrst step. With a growing proportion of an aging population
needing to address multiple chronic care conditions, and with healthcare systems looking to
design care delivery models to reduce costs by shifting chronic care management to clients’
homes using technologies, the challenge becomes one of tailoring care to such a population
effectively. The individuals in this age bracket have varying social, technological, and
educational capabilities to self-manage their care at home, and they need a mix of clinical
and non-clinical care providers to support their care. Using research on aging, this section
develops a set of services that can be used to create value that is tailored to the speciﬁc
client’s health condition and ecosystem needs;
Section 3 focuses on the second step. For the services identiﬁed in Section 2, we will
discuss the strategies used to design a digital platform to support value cycle activities.
With technologies helping clients monitor their health conditions and communicate with
healthcare providers, connecting the clients with various clinical actors (labs, pharmacies,
etc.) for treatment adherence, and non-clinical actors for social and emotional support,
the digital platform must work with conﬁgurable digital services that evolve as the client
needs and actors supporting these needs evolve. Using research on agile digital platforms,
this section develops a template for the design of an agile digital platform to support value
cycle activities;
Section 4 focuses on the third step. It illustrates the design of an agile digital platform
to support clients that suffer from delirium. With the growing use of the IoT to monitor a
client’s health condition in real time, and with the availability of AI technologies to analyze
a large volume of real-time data for learning and adaption [ 9], the digital platform will
address the client needs in a hospital. While its use is discussed within a provider context,
it can be used in a home care environment as well with adaptations;
Section 5 provides some concluding comments and Section 6 provides some directions
for future research.
2. Research on Aging and Services to Create Value
The term “aging” generally refers to our understanding of how we as human beings
progressively deteriorate in our health during our adult period of life [ 10]. When measured
on the life calendar, it often becomes a discrete number, and societies worldwide use such a
number to make assumptions about people’s ability to contribute to economic productivity
(e.g., setting an age for retirement), determine eligibility for government assistance (e.g.,
health insurance), and use statistical models to classify disease conditions such as chronic
care conditions (e.g., how a certain percentage of the older population contributes to
healthcare costs). Even health systems design care delivery models to provide care at home,
with the assumption that the digital services needed to deliver care have to support a
population with lower levels of visual and mobility capabilities, technological literacy, and
healthcare knowledge. This often induces bias in the way the systems are designed and
services are identiﬁed to create value. Therefore, stereotyping all adults over a certain age
as a single monolithic group for designing health services to deliver care at home leads to
missed opportunities [11].
Aging is a process, and innovations in medical science for clinical diagnosis and drug-
based therapies have been extending human life, thus transforming the older population
into a mix of sub-population groups with varying capabilities to manage their health con-
ditions. The concept of active aging, deﬁned by the World Health Organization [ 12], uses
eight classes of determinants to gather information for the possible clustering of services
for such populations. These include the physical environment, access to health and social
services, individual behaviors (healthy behaviors, addictions, medications), personal char-
acteristics (biology, genetics, psychology), support ecosystem (social support, violence and
abuse, education and literacy), economic factors (income, social protection, work), gender,Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 4 of 22
and culture. Overlying these determinants are other factors often considered in social
diagnosis [ 13], such as the roles people play (within their ecosystem), the relationships they
have (with others in their network), their reactions to ecosystem conditions (fear, stigma,
stress, etc.), and the resources they have (physical, economic, emotional). All of these can
inﬂuence the clients’ abilities to manage their health conditions as some of these factors
change. This means that healthcare value delivery is a dynamic process, and the services
used to create value must continue to evolve based on the feedback from value-in-use.
For the purposes of this discussion, we will use prior research to classify services
that create value into the following four types: self-health management, civic engagement,
caregiver engagement, and community engagement. While certain older population groups
today have limited literacy on health and technical knowledge, more baby boomers are
entering this age bracket and are increasingly conversant with and interested in using
technology to self-manage their health conditions. With a greater capacity to contribute,
these older populations can engage in many civic activities that beneﬁt both the community
and the health and wellbeing of the older adults. As health conditions deteriorate, some
begin to rely on services provided by professional or informal caregivers, such as family
members. Lastly, some older populations continue to face health inequities by virtue of
economic, social, and geographical disparities, and need the support of social services to
overcome barriers for access to quality care. We will look at each in detail below.
2.1. Self-Health Management Services
Several digital services to support population engagement at home are designed
to allow people to self-manage their health conditions. This includes sharing health
information, asking speciﬁc questions, seeking consultation, scheduling appointments, etc.
The technologies used to support these services can include patient portals, websites, and
digital health infomediaries [ 14]. The recent health emergency (COVID-19), in fact, has
made many of these digital services important for care delivery at home (e.g., telehealth
technologies). The effectiveness of such digital services depends on how engaged both
the patient and health care providers are in frequent communication and follow-ups in
the area of mental health [ 15]. Remote monitoring services are used, from tracking blood
sugar levels to other complex chronic care [ 16]. Social media technologies, such as digital
infomediaries, are used for consultation and seeking answers to medical questions [17].
In summary, there are important opportunities to create value for older clients who
want to self-manage their health conditions.
2.2. Civic Engagement Services
Even with medical advances and economic prosperity increasing longevity and well-
being, and moving more people into the broad category of the older population, ageism
continues to stigmatize this population in the labor market [ 18] and marginalize their role
in productive social engagement [ 19]. Active aging strategies include promoting physical
activity through volunteering and socializing [ 20]. These strategies can allow cities to
use multiple agencies to make public places health friendly [ 21,22] and engage the older
population in community-based voluntary activities [ 23]. Such an engagement in social,
economic, cultural, spiritual, and civic affairs can help reduce isolation and keep the older
population both physically and mentally active [ 24]. It can also lead to lower risks of
morbidities, disability, and cognitive decline, and their civic engagement can lead to better
physical and mental health, higher cognitive function, decreased loneliness, etc. [ 25]. In
summary, the engagement of the older population in voluntary services (e.g., social care,
and recreational and local community work) not only beneﬁts society, but also improves
the social and emotional health of the older population [26–28].
In summary, such a holistic and life-course approach means that the services used to
create value need to use a temporal lens, as the shorter and longer term needs of the older
population change over time. While health systems cannot be responsible for providing a
broader range of services and varying them over time, they need to leverage a network ofInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 5 of 22
actors, including private and government sectors and social entrepreneurs that focus on
providing social beneﬁts [29–31].
2.3. Caregiver Engagement Services
Even as the demand for home-based care for older adults is rising across many
high-income countries [ 32], the nature of this care is becoming multifaceted. The care is
sometimes designed to support both older adults and their informal caregivers, especially
when adults living at home start to lose mental capacities and the ability to care for
themselves. In other words, digital services have to meet the needs of both the patient
client and the caregiver client. The client services have to be time sensitive as the health
conditions continue to deteriorate by using services that test their physical and cognitive
capabilities to create value, such as reducing client falls or engaging in activities that
improve cognition [ 33,34]. The role of caregivers, informal as well as specialized, is
growing, and the challenge is to create cohesion between the services provided by the
healthcare provider and other actors while addressing risks [ 35–37]. Providing reliable
information and supporting trust building opportunities are key to engender the trust of
clients in seeking such services.
In summary, caregivers are unpaid family members, and they provide an important
means to reach and support this patient client population [ 38,39]. The services provided
should include services that will help caregivers manage their own health while caring
for others. Such caregiver services are even more important when the caregiver lives with
the person they are caring for [ 33]. With the availability of informal caregivers expected
to decrease as many families are not engaging in co-residency, the communication and
coordination of the caregiver and patient services requires a mix of value fulﬁllment
activities from multiple actors [40–42].
2.4. Community Engagement Services
While medical advances are increasing the life span, they are not necessarily inﬂuenc-
ing the economic status of many older adult citizens living under or near poverty [ 43,44].
Many hospitals are using community providers to address the social determinants that con-
tribute to health inequities (e.g., supporting transportation, nutrition assistance, childcare,
or education). Community health workers, peer navigators, etc., are often used to assist
clients with mental health problems, sexually transmitted diseases, and diabetes [ 45,46].
Some social agencies leverage the support of other social agencies, particularly when deliv-
ering care-related services is complex, as in supporting homeless populations [ 47]. With
many social factors determining a client’s ability to manage their health condition, the chal-
lenge is to look upstream for prevention and downstream for care transition post-hospital
discharge in order to identify the services needed and actors to engage with [48].
In summary, older adults with health inequities have limited resources and technolo-
gies, such as limited wireless access and/or smart phones. As seen during the COVID-19
health emergency, these clients are at a greater risk for infection and mortality [ 49], and
their self-isolation for safety led to psychological and social challenges [ 50,51]. There-
fore, innovative ways to deliver care to such populations has become critical during the
COVID-19 lockdowns [ 52], including the use of a mix of digital and non-digital services
(e.g., telephone, local community workers, etc.) to maintain social connections considered
essential [53] despite the technology barriers [54,55].
While this classiﬁcation is not exhaustive, it does provide a range of services to older
clients that span from self-health management to continual health monitoring in both
supportive and less than supportive ecosystems [ 46]. Using these four different service
types, Figure 1 below identiﬁes a list of services needed to support these clients. As
discussed earlier, the goal here is not to build a point-to-point solution that supports one
group by one provider and its partners, but to develop a platform that is agile to address
client needs as they evolve or change. The value fulﬁllment services that will become a
part of a digital platform are discussed in the next section.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 6 of 22
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 , 18, x  6 of 22 
 
 While this classification is not exhaustive, it  does provide a range of services to older 
clients that span from self-health management to continual health monitoring in both sup-
portive and less than supportive ecosystems [46] . Using these four different service types, 
Figure 1 below identifies a list of services needed to support these clients. As discussed 
earlier, the goal here is not to build a poin t-to-point solution that supports one group by 
one provider and its partners, but to develop a platform that is agile to address client 
needs as they evolve or change. The value fulf illment services that will become a part of a 
digital platform are discu ssed in the next section. 
 
Figure 1. A template of services to suppo rt select popu lation groups. 
3. Designing a Digital Platform to Support Agility 
A client-centric and value-driven service model to address care delivery outside a 
health system is a different paradigm for health care systems [56]. It represents a shift from 
the provider-centric view of “the doctor kn ows best” to a “patient-centric” view where 
care delivered at home is best for the pati ent and the provider. Healthcare organizations 
that have longer value cycles and multiple ac tors outside their ecos ystem fulfilling many 
value cycle activities, must tr ansform their care delivery models using advances in tech-
nologies. This is especially critical as chronic care conditions continue to predominate in older populations. 
Figure 1. A template of services to support select population groups.
3. Designing a Digital Platform to Support Agility
A client-centric and value-driven service model to address care delivery outside a
health system is a different paradigm for healthcare systems [ 56]. It represents a shift from
the provider-centric view of “the doctor knows best” to a “patient-centric” view where
care delivered at home is best for the patient and the provider. Healthcare organizations
that have longer value cycles and multiple actors outside their ecosystem fulﬁlling many
value cycle activities, must transform their care delivery models using advances in tech-
nologies. This is especially critical as chronic care conditions continue to predominate in
older populations.
In the drive to use technologies, one cannot ignore the human element when it comes
to digital service use. For example, digital services that leverage sensors in wearables to
drive behavioral change such as reducing obesity, will not be effective if the clients do not
know how to use these digital services. Web-based interventions or remote monitoring
services designed to measure hemoglobin A1c or blood pressure have limited impact on
client behavior without adequate training [ 57–59]. When digital services are supported
by social and community health workers that provide education and answer questions,
it improves their use [ 46,60]. When patient portals used to disseminate information are
contextualized to lead clients to ask questions and seek clariﬁcation, they can prove to be
of greater value [ 61]. Even with intuitive interfaces, such as videos to support physicalInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 7 of 22
or mental exercises and calming music to reduce pain, digital services will have a limited
impact when the patients have mobility challenges. Alternative technologies, such as
virtual reality (VR) goggles with animated games or travel to distant places, are shown to
be effective in reducing clients’ pain [62,63].
The examples discussed above highlight the importance of understanding the client
context or ecosystem where the value is perceived, so that care delivery models can be
effective. However, context is not static and client capabilities and expectations continue
to change. As clients become more experienced in using digital services and build their
capacity to self-manage their health condition by asking questions, seeking clariﬁcation
and second opinions, etc., the digital services have to adapt to address the changes in
client capabilities and expectations. In addition, the social ecosystem around a client may
change as well, such as their roles, relationships, reactions to their health condition, and
resources [ 13]. This makes client context dynamic, and continual value-in-use feedback is
needed to adapt the digital services to this evolving context. Implicitly, the mental model
or the “lens”, within which a client interprets the value created, evolves over time [ 64].
This is especially the case when a client condition deteriorates and the role of others (e.g.,
caregivers) increases, or when a client moves from a supportive ecosystem to a less than
supportive ecosystem. This has been seen during the COVID-19 pandemic, with many
clients moving from preventive care services to address food and economic insecurities.
Without claiming exhaustiveness, we will discuss the following three ways to make
digital services adapt to a changing client context: increase value cycle frequency, broaden
the scope of value-in-use assessment, and broaden the scale of value-in-use assessment.
3.1. Increase Value Cycle Frequency
The goal here is to make digital services adaptive by gathering feedback frequently
to track changing client expectations. The increased frequency of information gathering
has been shown to improve behavioral changes among clients. For example, the real-
time monitoring of glucose levels with education has been shown to improve individual
adherence [ 46], frequent feedback on sleep quality has shown improvement for clients
with apnea [ 65], and research is ongoing on how adaptive feedback control systems with
real-time feedback can improve smoking cessation behavior [66].
Remote and continual monitoring of clients generates large volumes of data, and tools
such as AI have become useful in identifying changing customer needs and redesigning
digital services accordingly. For example, an AI-assisted alert system was shown to be
effective in monitoring patients in an intensive care unit or emergency rooms [ 67]. Data
from a patient’s vital signs are analyzed to modify early warning scores that can lead
to predicting a cardiac arrest [ 9]. Even routinely available data analyzed by providers
can lead to decisions on how to alter external actor engagement in supporting clients
(e.g., emergency management technicians visiting clients at home, specialists consulting
nursing home patients, and staff changes in patient rooms) [ 46,68,69]. In summary, frequent
feedback from clients during value-in-use may lead to not only a reconﬁguration of digital
services, but also broaden the scope of actors used in value-in-use assessment. This is
discussed next.
3.2. Broaden the Scope of Value-in-Use Assessment
All innovative value propositions used to create value need the engagement of all the
actors, including clients, in value fulﬁllment. When these value propositions change to meet
customer expectations, it can lead to changes in the actors involved. The strategies used to
support the adoption and diffusion of an innovation (i.e., value-in-use of a digital service)
focus on client and digital service complexity [ 70]. In other words, value cycles have a
predictable frequency (i.e., how quickly feedback is used to redesign digital services to
create new value). However, changing the value cycle frequency to quickly monitor client
behavior means altering the value fulﬁllment frequency, and this may alter the behavior
of other actors. For example, consider a nurse calling system designed to use multipleInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 8 of 22
buttons for the following different types of services: bathroom visits, pain management,
and general information. When the speed to respond to a nurse call is altered to improve
patient satisfaction, using text alerts and escalation protocols that transfer calls to others
when response time is slow, this alters the value fulﬁllment activities of the nursing staff. If
there is a difference in the perceived value-in-use of the patients (e.g., immediate response
to a call made to nursing staff) and the perceived value-in-use of the nursing staff (e.g.,
staff’s perception of the “urgency of the call” depending of the call source, for example
surgical or cardiac patients vs. oncology or neurology patients) when the frequency of
the value cycle is changed, it can lead to not meeting patient expectations [ 69,71]. In
other words, increasing the value cycle frequency to address the context changes in the
clients may have a negative impact, or be misaligned with the actors who are fulﬁlling the
value created.
Such misalignment can be signiﬁcant when some value fulﬁllment activities use
machine actors (e.g., systems that send alerts when calls are made, escalate to others,
etc.) and others use human actors such as nursing staff, whose activities cannot change
quickly (e.g., process changes, policy implications, etc., take time to change). This is often
reﬂected in model or algorithmic bias or fairness when these biases get embedded in digital
services [ 72]. For example, the algorithms used to make predictions on heart conditions may
be biased if they undercount women and especially women of color, impacting diagnoses
and treatment plans [ 73]. When machine learning algorithms are used to make predictions
based on large volumes of data, they can minimize the inﬂuence of a few outliers, leading to
the misapplication of forecasted outcomes [ 74,75]. Research on the design for diffusion [ 76],
and being aware of the situation as a whole [ 77], calls for viewing the client context more
broadly as value fulﬁllment and value-in-use is occurring within a complex ecosystem with
many actors besides the clients. Therefore, when the value cycle frequency is increased
using machine actors to address the changes in context from client feedback, feedback is
also needed from other actors inﬂuencing value fulﬁllment. Such broadening of the scope
of value assessment (actors providing the feedback) means potentially broadening the scale
of value assessment as well, which is discussed next.
3.3. Broaden the Scale of Value-in-Use Assessment
Technology-induced change has been studied in decision support systems [ 78], and
clients using digital services to self-manage their care condition may seek different types
of information not supported by any of the digital service modules or components. For
example, as older peoples’ cognitive functions change over time, digital services used to
support caregivers must evolve as the patients deteriorate in their health conditions. Even
with limited access to mobile technology to care for their health conditions [ 79], vulnerable
populations saw their service needs dramatically change during COVID-19 (from preven-
tion to address food and economic insecurities). Those who used apps to manage their
glucose levels have started to want to use the apps to apply for health insurance [ 46]. Given
that many social determinants contribute to health inequities, addressing some of them
using digital services may lead to clients seeking other services, thus implicitly calling for
broadening the sources used to provide feedback, i.e., the scale of value assessment. As
one uses a digital service (e.g., mobile health unit (MHU) calling or texting each client to
provide information on COVID-19), it may lead to other services for which assistance is
needed (food, transportation, etc.). This can lead to gathering feedback on these to create
new services and altering current services given their interdependency.
In summary, digital services need to increase the frequency of value cycles to show less
bias in fulﬁlling value and greater agility to meet evolving client expectations. They also
need to assess any change in the scope (or depth) of all those involved in fulﬁlling the value,
and change in the scale (or breadth) of the services needed to address the clients’ value
expectations. The design of a digital platform to support such agility is discussed next.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 9 of 22
3.4. Building an Agile Digital Platform
As organizations use agile models of structure and governance to support the explo-
ration and evaluation of new services to create and fulﬁll value and leverage technologies
to design digital services, they similarly need an agile software ecosystem that uses a
number of digital service modules or components that can be easily conﬁgured to adapt to
the evolving client needs. Figure 2 shows some of the service modules designed to support
the select senior population segments discussed in the previous section. The software
modules interact with each other, potentially across partner and client ecosystems, using a
distributed digital platform. This platform supports the communication of information and
the coordination of value cycle activities among all the actors involved. Each service mod-
ule supports a distinct value proposition (e.g., searching for an external caregiver, tracking
health conditions using a glucose monitor, ﬁnding a physician to get a second opinion).
They can be conﬁgured to work together to create value for a client, such as a caregiver
servicing a dementia patient or an older client looking to monitor their blood pressure.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 , 18, x  9 of 22 
 
 ing for broadening the sources used to prov ide feedback, i.e., the scale of value assess-
ment. As one uses a digital service (e.g., mobile health unit (MHU) calling or texting each 
client to provide information on COVID-19), it may lead to other services for which assis-
tance is needed (food, transportation, etc.). Th is can lead to gathering feedback on these 
to create new services and altering current services given their interdependency. 
In summary, digital services need to increase the frequency of value cycles to show 
less bias in fulfilling value and greater agility to meet evolving client expectations. They 
also need to assess any change in the scope (or depth) of all those involved in fulfilling the 
value, and change in the scale (or breadth) of the services needed to address the clients’ value expectations. The design of a digital platform to support such agility is discussed next. 
3.4. Building an Agile Digital Platform 
As organizations use agile models of structure and governance to support the explo-
ration and evaluation of new services to crea te and fulfill value and leverage technologies 
to design digital services, they similarly need an agile software ecos ystem that uses a num-
ber of digital service modules or components that can be easily configured to adapt to the 
evolving client needs. Figure 2 shows some of the service modules designed to support 
the select senior population segments discu ssed in the previous section. The software 
modules interact with each other, potentially across partner and client ecosystems, using 
a distributed digital platform. This platform  supports the communication of information 
and the coordination of value cycle activities  among all the actors involved. Each service 
module supports a distinct value proposition (e.g., searching for an external caregiver, 
tracking health conditions using a glucose monitor, finding a physician to get a second opinion). They can be configured to work together to create value for a client, such as a 
caregiver servicing a dementia patient or an older client looking to monitor their blood 
pressure. 
 
Figure 2. Digital platform to support digital service configuration. 
A recent institute of electrical and electr onics engineers (IEEE) special Issue on man-
aging software ecosystems has recognized th e need for agile ecosystems to support com-
plex and dynamic environments such as the one discussed here [80]. There can be a mix 
Figure 2. Digital platform to support digital service conﬁguration.
A recent institute of electrical and electronics engineers (IEEE) special Issue on manag-
ing software ecosystems has recognized the need for agile ecosystems to support complex
and dynamic environments such as the one discussed here [ 80]. There can be a mix of
autonomous and automated systems tracking rapid changes in the external environment,
and a mix of machine actors (software systems). Human actors (in the clinical and non-
clinical ecosystem), including technology developers, need a digital platform to support
their collaboration [ 81] and interactions to share data and collaborate their activities in
real time [ 82]. Such a dynamic orchestration of digital services has shown success in
multi-tenant business networks during run-time as actors join and leave [ 83], and among
innovation ecosystems where ideas are generated and evaluated [84].
A dynamic software ecosystem for rapidly evolving client expectations, as shown in
Figure 2, needs not only increased frequency of value assessment for reconﬁguration, but
an ability to address potential changes in the scope and scale of such an assessment. For
example, if the run-time feedback on deﬁned parameters (e.g., pain medication requests
from a nurse call system or smart bed alerts for bathroom support) is lower than expected,
what conclusions follow? Did it address a value proposition (i.e., patient satisfaction
attributed to staff response)? Should it lead to broadening of the scale by seeking feedback
on other services (e.g., food catering services, discharge services, etc.)? Should it lead to aInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 10 of 22
deepening of the scope by seeking feedback from other actors in the network (e.g., nursing
staff on changing patient conditions, improved care processes such as hourly rounding,
etc.)? Such an insight on the scope and scale needed in value assessment requires an
understanding of the client or actor intent and should be explicitly considered in the design
of the digital services.
In summary, gathering client intent if other value-in-use feedback is not sufﬁcient to
autonomously reconﬁgure digital services is needed if agile digital platforms and software
ecosystems are to support a health system that is seeking to support client needs quickly
using value cycle activities. One pilot application that combines client intent and a dynamic
software ecosystem is discussed in the next section.
4. Digital Platform to Support Patients with Delirium
A fear of falling is often a contributor to fall injuries inside and outside hospitals [ 85].
Such a fear is a pervasive psychological problem in older people and not only contributes
to falls [ 86], but also makes them avoid activities that can keep them healthy, i.e., less
dependent on society and medications [ 87–89]. We will focus on one particular symptom
of this, delirium, which contributes to the fear of falling. The digital platform that uses
advanced technologies and digital services to create, fulﬁll, and assess value-in-use to
support delirium patients is summarized in Figure 3, and is elaborated on in this section.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 , 18, x  10 of 22 
 
 of autonomous and automated systems tracking rapid changes in the external environ-
ment, and a mix of machine actors (software systems). Human actors (in the clinical and 
non-clinical ecosystem), including technology  developers, need a digital platform to sup-
port their collaboration [81] and interactions to share data and collaborate their activities in real time [82]. Such a dynamic orchestration of digital services has shown success in 
multi-tenant business networks during run-time as actors join and leave [83], and among 
innovation ecosystems where ideas are generated and evaluated [84]. 
A dynamic software ecosystem for rapidly ev olving client expectations, as shown in 
Figure 2, needs not only increased frequency of value assessment for reconfiguration, but an ability to address potential changes in the scope and scale of such an assessment. For 
example, if the run-time feedback on defined pa rameters (e.g., pain medication requests 
from a nurse call system or smart bed alerts for bathroom support) is lower than expected, 
what conclusions follow? Did it address a valu e proposition (i.e., patient satisfaction at-
tributed to staff response)? Should it lead to  broadening of the scale by seeking feedback 
on other services (e.g., food catering services, discharge services, etc.)? Should it lead to a 
deepening of the scope by seeking feedback from other actors in the network (e.g., nursing 
staff on changing patient conditions, improv ed care processes such as hourly rounding, 
etc.)? Such an insight on the scope and scale needed in value assessment requires an un-
derstanding of the client or actor intent and should be explicitly considered in the design 
of the digital services.  
In summary, gathering client intent if other value-in-use feedback is not sufficient to 
autonomously reconfigure digital services is  needed if agile digital platforms and soft-
ware ecosystems are to support a health syst em that is seeking to support client needs 
quickly using value cycle activities. One pilot application that combines client intent and 
a dynamic software ecosystem is discussed in the next section. 
4.
 Digital Platform to Support  Patients with Delirium 
A fear of falling is often a contributor to fall injuries inside and outside hospitals [85]. 
Such a fear is a pervasive psychological problem in older people and not only contributes 
to falls [86], but also makes them avoid activi ties that can keep them healthy, i.e., less 
dependent on society and medications [87–89]. We will focus on one particular symptom 
of this, delirium, which contribu tes to the fear of falling. The digital platform that uses 
advanced technologies and digital services to create, fulfill, and assess value-in-use to 
support delirium patients is summarized in Figure  3, and is elaborated on in this section. 
 
Figure 3. Digital platform to support delirium patients. 
Figure 3. Digital platform to support delirium patients.
4.1. Clients
Delirium is considered a syndrome due to its multicomplex nature and is dangerous-
ness. It is common in older hospitalized adults, with a prevalence of about 30–50%, and
affects around seven million patients annually. A big challenge for healthcare systems is
that this syndrome can go undiagnosed by healthcare team members, including nurses
and physicians. This leads to a longer length of hospital stay, loss of physical function,
which can lead to institutionalization at long-term care facilities, progression to dementia,
and even death. The major challenges of the effective management of delirium include
the need for a multidisciplinary approach, difﬁculties with risk modiﬁcation, and a lack
of effective low-risk pharmacological treatments. Thus, a system that can assist in early
identiﬁcation, by means of timely screening and assessment, is needed so that precipitating
factors can be identiﬁed and removed for improvement in patient care. Clients with cogni-
tive impairment can fall during “unexpected care windows”, and no amount of nursing
resources can prevent these falls. However, such falls contribute to hospital admissions,Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 11 of 22
medical treatments, and high insurance costs, not to mention the personal physical and
psychological pain to the patients.
4.2. Technologies
Remote monitoring of such patients can be done using wearable-based, non-wearable-
based, and fusion-based systems [ 90]. The wearable-based system uses sensors tied to
various body parts, but are relatively inﬂexible and uncomfortable. The non-wearable-
based systems, such as smartphone-based solutions, could be a very competitive alternative
to the conventional wearable systems for fall detection [ 91]. However, as discussed earlier,
when the value cycle frequency increases due to remote monitoring, multiple sources of
information are needed to be analyzed, and fusion-based systems can help leverage diverse
information sources. In the proposed system, information from visual clues are combined
with audio responses to questions posed by the system to understand patient intent in
creating and assessing value-in-use for patients.
In the digital platform proposed, called SeVa, the frontend used to create value is a
mobile application written in the Apple iOS native program language Swift on Xcode 11,
which runs on the iOS device with iOS 13. The chatbot engine is Dialogﬂow, a UI-based
platform for creating smart and proactive chatbots. SeVA is a fusion-based system, and
supports remote diagnosis and medical consultation. The SeVA backend server to fulﬁll
value has four dedicated advanced reduced instruction set computer machines (ARMs)
with 2GB memory and the Ubuntu Xenial system.
The remote monitoring service here includes a fusion of clues from the audio and
visual content. It connects the following two different environments: SeVA Patient Room
app (SPR), which is an application that resides in a patient room or ecosystem, and SeVA
Master Control app (SMC), which is a master control application that resides in the provider
ecosystem, connected to both the autonomous part of the digital service as well as the
human actor engaged component, i.e., nursing station to react to speciﬁc patient context.
4.3. Value Creating Services
The value creating services are supported using a remote diagnosis that does not use
text but rather visual gestures, such as the waving of hands or visual eye movement, as
well as voice conversation. Both of these are important for elders or patients suffering
with delirium. It uses personalized conversation to answer questions and provide advice.
Speciﬁcally, the system creates value to clients by responding to patient gestures with
consultation sessions. In addition, it does regular checks to ensure that the patient condi-
tion is monitored periodically, including a morning check and hourly rounding. It uses
delirium checks to assess a patient’s cognitive capabilities and provides music to create a
relaxed environment to reduce stress and/or help clients manage pain. Table 1 lists these
patient services.
Table 1. Seva skills in the Dialogﬂow.
Type Skill Story Description
Movement Response Sensor ResponseFall detectionRespond to patient and notify
nurse by recognizing
patient movement. Wave
Regular CheckHourly RoundingFeeling check
Perform regular hourly check
to fulﬁll patient needs actively.Restroom check
Brace check
Heat pack check
Delirium CheckWhat day is today?Perform regular delirium
check to evaluate
patient cognition. List weekdays in reversed orderInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 12 of 22
Table 1. Cont.
Type Skill Story Description
RelaxationsSoothing Music Play music
Use music, jokes, and small
talk to improve patient’s
mental state.Small Talk Random talk
JokeTell me a joke
More jokes
4.4. Value Fulﬁllment Service Modules
The service begins when the chatbot engine receives a trigger upon patient touch or
sound. It sends the ﬁrst sentence to the SPR and then waits for the patient’s response (i.e.,
returning sentence). The patient’s response will then be classiﬁed as the intent “Yes” or
“No”, each leading to a different set of conversations. For periodic monitoring, such as
hourly and morning checks, the SPR will ask a question every hour (except for the rest
hour) to make sure the client’s needs are satisﬁed.
For delirium checks, the SPR starts by checking the patient’s delirium status by asking
questions, or launches the delirium check game and uses cognitive assessment tests [ 92].
Two delirium check games are used at present. The ﬁrst game, “Connect Node”, is used
for testing visuospatial and executive ability. The patient is required to connect the node in
a given order. If a patient fails the test, a message will be immediately sent to the SMC. The
second game, “Click Animal”, tests patient attention. Pictures are displayed and disappear.
The patient has to click the animal picture. The checking result will also be sent to the SeVA
Master Control application. For supporting relaxation services, the SPR has embedded
music created by the therapist in order to create a calm atmosphere and relieve panic.
Figure 4 shows the coordination of the value fulﬁlling activities using a particular
scenario, beginning with an action from the patient. The fulﬁllment of the activities
supported by the chatbot engine scenario are deﬁned by medical staff.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 , 18, x  13 of 22 
 
  
Figure 4. Coordination of activities among multip le actors within SeVa architecture. 
4.5. Agile Digital Platform to Suppor t Activity Coordination among Actors 
Since many of the components of the system are autonomous agents (or machine 
actors), the activity of each actor is discu ssed below. Some of these are running continu-
ally, and others are trigged based on new ev ents. Within the actor-network theory, this 
human–machine–other human (e.g.,  nurse) interaction has to occur throughout the entire 
value cycle and let the value-in-use feedback be used to support agility in the software 
ecosystem. To coordinate the activities, the system here functions as discussed below. 
Upon user registration and authentication, the user conversation can be initiated by 
hand waving, using the wake-up word, or simp ly touching the screen. Currently, a smart 
wristband detects the user movement and another sensor detects a patient’s wave gesture. 
Once an event is triggered, it will be routed to  the chatbot engine to initiate the conversa-
tion using the SeVA mobile application. 
The chatbot engine transforms the user’s voice into plain text, which is processed by 
the natural language processing (NLP ) module. Using discrete word pre-processing and 
tokenizing, it is sent to a recurrent neural  network (RNN) module. The output of the RNN 
is matching the word candidates if the patient poses a directly interpretable request or a 
suggested intent score of the patient’s question. If it is an intent score that needs further 
interpretation, it is then sent to the dialogue  engine of the expert system module to decide 
on the final interpretation of the patient request. See Figure 5. 
The medical expert defines skills, such as interpreting the intent and trigger, and re-
plies. Once the intent matches with the skil ls, the system can begin the conversation au-
tonomously. The skill used to begin the next  conversation is derived from a knowledge 
base of skills, and this can be triggered either  by a directly interpreted patient request or 
extracted from the interpretation using both the RNN and expert knowledge. 
 
Figure 5. Chatbot engine skill and story design. 
Figure 4. Coordination of activities among multiple actors within SeVa architecture.
 A patient begins the scenario with an event, for example “waving hand.” When this
patient request is received, the peripheral sensor recognizes the action and sends an
hypertext transfer protocol secure (HTTPS) request to the SeVA backend server;
 The request is parsed to fetch the necessary information, such as the room number,
from the database in order to trigger the chatbot engine to begin the conversation. The
SeVA patient room application has a WebSocket connection with the chatbot engine
so that the conversation can be executed;
 The conversation result is sent back to the SeVA backend server in the form of a SeVA
command, and it is sent to the SeVA Master Control application in the nurse room;Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 13 of 22
 This leads to the nurse taking timely intervention if this is a critical event;
 The running status of the system is monitored continually by the monitoring server to
ensure system reliability.
4.5. Agile Digital Platform to Support Activity Coordination among Actors
Since many of the components of the system are autonomous agents (or machine
actors), the activity of each actor is discussed below. Some of these are running continually,
and others are trigged based on new events. Within the actor-network theory, this human–
machine–other human (e.g., nurse) interaction has to occur throughout the entire value
cycle and let the value-in-use feedback be used to support agility in the software ecosystem.
To coordinate the activities, the system here functions as discussed below.
Upon user registration and authentication, the user conversation can be initiated by
hand waving, using the wake-up word, or simply touching the screen. Currently, a smart
wristband detects the user movement and another sensor detects a patient’s wave gesture.
Once an event is triggered, it will be routed to the chatbot engine to initiate the conversation
using the SeVA mobile application.
The chatbot engine transforms the user’s voice into plain text, which is processed by
the natural language processing (NLP) module. Using discrete word pre-processing and
tokenizing, it is sent to a recurrent neural network (RNN) module. The output of the RNN
is matching the word candidates if the patient poses a directly interpretable request or a
suggested intent score of the patient’s question. If it is an intent score that needs further
interpretation, it is then sent to the dialogue engine of the expert system module to decide
on the ﬁnal interpretation of the patient request. See Figure 5.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 , 18, x  13 of 22 
 
  
Figure 4. Coordination of activities among multip le actors within SeVa architecture. 
4.5. Agile Digital Platform to Suppor t Activity Coordination among Actors 
Since many of the components of the system are autonomous agents (or machine 
actors), the activity of each actor is discu ssed below. Some of these are running continu-
ally, and others are trigged based on new ev ents. Within the actor-network theory, this 
human–machine–other human (e.g.,  nurse) interaction has to occur throughout the entire 
value cycle and let the value-in-use feedback be used to support agility in the software 
ecosystem. To coordinate the activities, the system here functions as discussed below. 
Upon user registration and authentication, the user conversation can be initiated by 
hand waving, using the wake-up word, or simp ly touching the screen. Currently, a smart 
wristband detects the user movement and another sensor detects a patient’s wave gesture. 
Once an event is triggered, it will be routed to  the chatbot engine to initiate the conversa-
tion using the SeVA mobile application. 
The chatbot engine transforms the user’s voice into plain text, which is processed by 
the natural language processing (NLP ) module. Using discrete word pre-processing and 
tokenizing, it is sent to a recurrent neural  network (RNN) module. The output of the RNN 
is matching the word candidates if the patient poses a directly interpretable request or a 
suggested intent score of the patient’s question. If it is an intent score that needs further 
interpretation, it is then sent to the dialogue  engine of the expert system module to decide 
on the final interpretation of the patient request. See Figure 5. 
The medical expert defines skills, such as interpreting the intent and trigger, and re-
plies. Once the intent matches with the skil ls, the system can begin the conversation au-
tonomously. The skill used to begin the next  conversation is derived from a knowledge 
base of skills, and this can be triggered either  by a directly interpreted patient request or 
extracted from the interpretation using both the RNN and expert knowledge. 
 
Figure 5. Chatbot engine skill and story design. 
Figure 5. Chatbot engine skill and story design.
The medical expert deﬁnes skills, such as interpreting the intent and trigger, and
replies. Once the intent matches with the skills, the system can begin the conversation
autonomously. The skill used to begin the next conversation is derived from a knowledge
base of skills, and this can be triggered either by a directly interpreted patient request or
extracted from the interpretation using both the RNN and expert knowledge.
4.6. Agile Digital Platform to Support Information Sharing among Actors
The following ﬁve-layer framework is used to support the communication of data
among the actors in the value cycle: infrastructure layer, data layer, scenario layer, applica-
tion layer, and security layer. For more information on the infrastructure, see Appendix A.
The infrastructure layer provides the basic hardware requirement of the data collec-
tion unit. It includes the minimum requirement for deploying our system to a different
environment, as most of our system service is on the cloud.
The data layer processes the incoming raw data from the infrastructure layer. The
main tasks here are the text-to-speech conversion, speech-to-text conversion, and action
recognition, using a neural network as the backbone. The patient action is recognizedInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 14 of 22
based on the temporal movement data, and a long-short-term memory neural network
processes this input. The output of this layer will be the conversation plain text and the
user action classiﬁed as a result.
The scenario layer contains the scenario provided to the professional medical expert
and its return as a conversation presented to the user. More speciﬁcally, the medical expert
predeﬁnes the scenario representation with the related incoming conversation plain text or
action class. This will lead to a conversation and initiates a trigger to instantiate the next
program or module in the application layer.
The application layer consists of the following two mobile applications: the SPR
application and the SMC application. The SPR application will work as the main interface
for the patient. The SMC app is designed for the medical staff to receive notiﬁcations from
the patient room and return quick feedback to the patient.
The security layer serves as the auxiliary component of the system as it is critical when-
ever the patient data are moved across networks. In this application, all the data collected
conform to the privacy policy with the consent of the user, and the data transmission and
storage is executed in an encrypted form. For system robustness, dual systems are used
in case of disruption, such as accidental break down of a server, and crash reports in the
application layer and system monitoring server are used to respond to any anomalies in
system behavior. The chat messages on the Internet are analyzed for author identiﬁcation
using machine learning algorithms [ 93], an intermediate security broker is used to improve
data privacy and security when communication occurs between the cloud and the user [ 94],
biometric-based authentication schemes are used to help protect patient privacy [ 95], an
IoT security framework is used to protect smart infrastructures from cyber-attacks [ 96],
and trusted data servers are used to protect user information using differentiated privacy
protocols [97].
In summary, all the client interactions are supported by the SeVA Patient Room
app (SPR) as shown in Figure 6, using an Apple built-in speech framework for both the
speech-to-text and text-to-speech conversion. It uses authorization and user conﬁguration
pages for tailoring value creating services. The value fulﬁlling activity coordination is
supported by the SeVA Master Control app (SMC) situated in a staff room where the nurses
are located. It monitors the client status from the messages received regularly from the
SPR, and provides the feedback from the nurses, if warranted. The SMC lets the nurses
monitor the status in multiple patient rooms and process incoming requests. The nurse can
send back acknowledgement, such as communicating critical movement information like
“patient is sitting up” on the textbox to direct timely nurse intervention.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 , 18, x  15 of 22 
 
  
Figure 6. SPR application user interface. 
5. Conclusions  
Returning to the research question posed in Section one, in building an agile digital 
platform to address population health within a client ecosystem, it is necessary to consider 
the following two areas: (1) understanding the services needed to create value and design-
ing digital services that leverage technologies accessible to clients to fulfill the value; and 
(2) designing an agile digital platform that can evolve with changing client needs by 
quickly reconfiguring the digital services needed  to fulfill the value. With the client con-
text changing continuously, th e real-time tracking of value-in-use is needed to support 
the reconfiguration of digital services using bo th advanced technologies, such as Internet 
of Things (IoT), NLP, and artificial intelligence tools such as neural networks, as well as 
human interaction and engagement (e.g., client  and nursing staff). The value of classifying 
service types to segment population group need s in creating value, modularization of ser-
vice modules for faster reconfiguration to fulfill value, and value-in-use feedback to assess 
both the depth and breadth of changes in a client context to create value for the next value 
cycle is proposed. While no digital platform can be agile enough to  support the evolving 
client intent, the case study uses questions as  a potential strategy to surface the evolving 
needs of the client. 
The digital platform developed to support delirium patients is currently being eval-
uated for its viability within a hospital setting , using a set of services considered critical 
to reduce patient falls. One of the goals of buil ding an agile digital platform is to be able 
to add new services where there is change in the scale (e.g., new services are needed when 
the patient moves from the hospital to home) or scope (e.g., the condition of a patient 
changes and needs the engagement of caregivers to respond to needs as opposed to pro-
fessional nurses in a hospital). While we can’t claim that the platform will support all fu-
ture changes, both the service modularization and flexible architecture used to create and 
fulfill value should help its adaptation when new information sharing and activity coor-dination is called for. Work is on-going in supporting such agility. 
  
Figure 6. SPR application user interface.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 15 of 22
5. Conclusions
Returning to the research question posed in Section one, in building an agile digital
platform to address population health within a client ecosystem, it is necessary to consider
the following two areas: (1) understanding the services needed to create value and de-
signing digital services that leverage technologies accessible to clients to fulﬁll the value;
and (2) designing an agile digital platform that can evolve with changing client needs
by quickly reconﬁguring the digital services needed to fulﬁll the value. With the client
context changing continuously, the real-time tracking of value-in-use is needed to support
the reconﬁguration of digital services using both advanced technologies, such as Internet
of Things (IoT), NLP , and artiﬁcial intelligence tools such as neural networks, as well as
human interaction and engagement (e.g., client and nursing staff). The value of classifying
service types to segment population group needs in creating value, modularization of
service modules for faster reconﬁguration to fulﬁll value, and value-in-use feedback to
assess both the depth and breadth of changes in a client context to create value for the
next value cycle is proposed. While no digital platform can be agile enough to support the
evolving client intent, the case study uses questions as a potential strategy to surface the
evolving needs of the client.
The digital platform developed to support delirium patients is currently being evalu-
ated for its viability within a hospital setting, using a set of services considered critical to
reduce patient falls. One of the goals of building an agile digital platform is to be able to
add new services where there is change in the scale (e.g., new services are needed when the
patient moves from the hospital to home) or scope (e.g., the condition of a patient changes
and needs the engagement of caregivers to respond to needs as opposed to professional
nurses in a hospital). While we can’t claim that the platform will support all future changes,
both the service modularization and ﬂexible architecture used to create and fulﬁll value
should help its adaptation when new information sharing and activity coordination is
called for. Work is on-going in supporting such agility.
6. Directions for Future Research
The unprecedented content from clients and partners, and the urgency to act quickly
to empower and engage clients in self-managing their care within their ecosystem, is
leading to the rapid digital transformation of healthcare organizations [ 98]. Such digital
transformation, as it is linked to performance on quality, convenience, and lower costs in
population health, may call for disruptive delivery models [ 99]. This means that adminis-
trative leadership models that have permeated healthcare organizations with a culture that
values long service, organized groups of teams and professionals motivated by personal
and professional standards, and external accountabilities [ 100], are no longer adequate.
Visionary leadership and organizational change have to complement administrative leader-
ship with enabling and adaptive leadership processes [ 101] to let innovative client-centric
and value-focused digital services support change incrementally and a culture of learning
cumulatively. A future research question is, “What agile digital services and the popula-
tion groups they service can help lead to sustained digital transformation that improves
performance and mitigates risks of all actors involved, including clients?”
The discussion and the case study argue for an agile digital platform that not only
brings together clients and clinical and non-clinical care providers, but also a mix of human
and machine actors using a set of automated and autonomous digital services dynamically
to create and fulﬁll value. Research on the actor-network theory [ 102] suggests that we
often fail to distinguish between the efﬁcacy of the network and the efﬁcacy of the processes
used in the formation of the network itself. We discussed the design of digital platforms to
make a network agile, where clinical and non-clinical actors used value cycle activities and
digital services to address the needs of the population groups. A future research question
is, “How can the digital platform expand its agility to redeﬁne the network itself?” For
example, can the digital platform used to support delirium patients learn from the client
questions their evolving intent, such as the need to reduce stress or help avoid isolationInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 16 of 22
by adding new digital actors (e.g., a new digital service that autonomously delivers audio
or video content to suit the client’s tastes in music) or new human actors (e.g., add an
automated digital service that uses teleconsultation with a mental health counselor or a
social media interaction with others to exchange stories or play games)? Both of these call
for altering the process used to create the network, which in turn is used to create value.
Author Contributions: M.R.T., conceptualization, investigation, methodology, project administra-
tion, writing—original draft and review and editing; N.A., investigation, project administration,
resources, software, validation and visualization, review and editing; A.S., conceptualization, method-
ology, review and editing; S.H., investigation, methodology, resources and software. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received funding from the University of Arizona Foundation.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable as the study discussed is a system designed
to support patients and does not involve human subject use and evaluation at this time.
Informed Consent Statement: Not Applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The authors conﬁrm that the data supporting the digital platform
development are available within the article and referenced material.
Acknowledgments: We want to thank the U of Arizona PHP 305 class students for generating
ideas on potential services that will address the needs of seniors living at home with various
health conditions.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Appendix A
Technologies
Mobile applications have used AI to support interaction with patients and providers.
Some are used to assistant a patient in improving their healthy lifestyle, providing medical
advice, or remotely monitoring a patient for diagnosis. A healthy lifestyle assistant applica-
tion is used for disease prevention by providing suggestions for healthy eating, physical
exercise, etc., (e.g., Pact Care provides a patient-centric healthcare data solution, Florence is
a chatbot based personal health assistant that provides medication reminders and tracks
health conditions, and AI chatbots are used for remote monitoring to provide nutrition
education and behavior change interventions) [103].
Remote monitoring services to fulﬁll value have been used to support client–provider
interactions for diagnosis, especially when there are limited medical resources within
a geographical region. These applications are using AI to assist patients in ﬁnding re-
mote doctors for diagnosis [ 104], engage in consultation based on a picture or text input
from mobile devices, assist patients to self-diagnose and triage for appropriate care using
chatbot consultations [ 105,106], as well as provide suggestions on generic medicine for
children [107].
With the advancement of natural language processing, value cycle interactions can
be made more effective as it allows for conversational knowledge to support the patient–
provider interaction in real time. For example, Microsoft’s healthcare bot is used to build
and deploy conversational medical experience at scale [ 108]. Combining this with natural
language capabilities, IBM’s question-answering Watson has been used as a “diagnosis
and treatment advisor” to assist physicians [109].
Architecture
This architecture provides a general methodology for building a chatbot-based health-
care system that uses real-time patient data as an input for diagnosis, and expert medical
knowledge as a resource to provide advice. The dark background blocks in Figure A1 repre-
sent the foundation or necessary utility of the technologies associated with the SeVa system.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 17 of 22
The infrastructure layer provides the basic hardware requirement of the data collec-
tion unit. It includes the minimum requirement for deploying our system to a different
environment, as most of our system service is on the cloud.
 The wireless network block works as a communication module for real-time data transmission;
 The mobile device, such as the tablet or cell phone, shows the user interface and
conducts the conversation. The peripheral sensor collects patient movement data to
infer the patient position status without infringing user privacy;
 The voice data and movement data will then be transferred to the upper layer.
Thedata layer processes the incoming raw data from the infrastructure layer. The main
task here is text-to-speech conversion, speech-to-text conversion, and action recognition,
using a neural network as the backbone. We use a neural network as the backbone to solve
the task, and RNN is considered appropriate for this step-by-step approach used to solve
the problem.
The scenario layer contains the scenario provided to the professional medical expert
and its return as a conversation presented to the user. A chatbot engine is used to support
the scenario representation.
The application layer consists of the following two mobile applications: the SPR
application and the SMC application. The SPR application will work as the main interface
for the patient. The SMC app is designed for the medical staff to receive notiﬁcations from
the patient room and return quick feedback to the patient.
The security layer serves as the auxiliary component of the system as it is critical
whenever patient data are moved across networks.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 , 18, x  18 of 22 
 
  
Figure A1. Communication of information supported  by the SeVa system framework. 
Additional Architectural Details to Support Patient Interaction 
Upon user registration, a lo gin request from the user is sent to the SeVA backend 
server for authentication. Upon authentication , the user conversation can be initiated by 
hand waving, using the wake-u p word, or simply touching the screen. The peripheral 
sensors monitor the patient’s status continuously and look for an event to occur before a response is triggered, such as user movement  and a patient’s wave gesture. Once an event 
is triggered, it will be routed to the chatbot engine to initiate the conversation using the 
SeVA mobile application. 
The chatbot engine transforms the user’s qu estion into plain text, which is processed 
by the NLP module and sent to an RNN modu le. The output of the RNN is a suggested 
intent score of the patient’s question. If it is  an intent score that needs further interpreta-
tion, it is then sent to the dialogue engine of the expert system module to decide on the 
final interpretation of the patient request. Th e medical expert defines skills, such as inter-
preting the intent and trigger, and replies. A skill is composed of inputs, slots, replies, 
actions, and stories, as discussed in Table 1 . The inputs define events that a bot can react 
to. The slots are the memory of the bot fo r remembering some information during the 
conversation. The replies are all the possible sentences that a bot can reply to a user. The 
stories define the logic behind a skill. In su mmary, the input is differentiated by the RNN, 
which has trained with the sample inputs. Once the intent matches with the skills, the 
system can begin the conversation autonomously . The skill used to begin the next conver-
sation is derived from a knowledge base of sk ills, and this can be triggered either by a 
directly interpreted patient request or extrac ted from the interpretation using both the 
RNN and expert knowledge.  
The SeVA backend server processes all the incoming requests and manages the user 
data. It centrally coordinates activities, such  as user account management, and uses APIs 
to connect the mobile application, database, and monitoring server. It uses a monitoring 
server along with the backend server to trac k API availability, the number of actors en-
gaged in interaction, and the current system status. It tracks abnormal behaviors, such as backend server API unavailability or nurse unavailability, for online interaction and re-
ports them to the appropriate st akeholders through an email. 
References 
1. McKinsey Digital. Rethinking Customer Journeys with the Next-Generation Operating Model ; McKinsey & Company: New York, 
NY, USA, 2018. 
2. Vargo, S.L.; Lusch, R.F. Why “service”? J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 2008 , 36, 25–38. 
Figure A1. Communication of information supported by the SeVa system framework.
Additional Architectural Details to Support Patient Interaction
Upon user registration, a login request from the user is sent to the SeVA backend
server for authentication. Upon authentication, the user conversation can be initiated by
hand waving, using the wake-up word, or simply touching the screen. The peripheral
sensors monitor the patient’s status continuously and look for an event to occur before a
response is triggered, such as user movement and a patient’s wave gesture. Once an event
is triggered, it will be routed to the chatbot engine to initiate the conversation using the
SeVA mobile application.
The chatbot engine transforms the user’s question into plain text, which is processed
by the NLP module and sent to an RNN module. The output of the RNN is a suggestedInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 18 of 22
intent score of the patient’s question. If it is an intent score that needs further interpretation,
it is then sent to the dialogue engine of the expert system module to decide on the ﬁnal
interpretation of the patient request. The medical expert deﬁnes skills, such as interpreting
the intent and trigger, and replies. A skill is composed of inputs, slots, replies, actions, and
stories, as discussed in Table 1. The inputs deﬁne events that a bot can react to. The slots
are the memory of the bot for remembering some information during the conversation. The
replies are all the possible sentences that a bot can reply to a user. The stories deﬁne the
logic behind a skill. In summary, the input is differentiated by the RNN, which has trained
with the sample inputs. Once the intent matches with the skills, the system can begin the
conversation autonomously. The skill used to begin the next conversation is derived from
a knowledge base of skills, and this can be triggered either by a directly interpreted patient
request or extracted from the interpretation using both the RNN and expert knowledge.
The SeVA backend server processes all the incoming requests and manages the user
data. It centrally coordinates activities, such as user account management, and uses APIs
to connect the mobile application, database, and monitoring server. It uses a monitoring
server along with the backend server to track API availability, the number of actors engaged
in interaction, and the current system status. It tracks abnormal behaviors, such as backend
server API unavailability or nurse unavailability, for online interaction and reports them to
the appropriate stakeholders through an email.
References
1. McKinsey Digital. Rethinking Customer Journeys with the Next-Generation Operating Model ; McKinsey & Company: New York, NY,
USA, 2018.
2. Vargo, S.L.; Lusch, R.F. Why “service”? J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 2008 ,36, 25–38. [CrossRef]
3. Aghena, W.; De Smet, A.; Weerda, K. Agility: It Rhymes with Stability. McKinsey Quarterly. 2015. Available online: https:
//www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/agility-it-rhymes-with-stability (accessed on 1 December
2015).
4. Saini, V .; Tanniru, M.; Liang, T.P . E-relationship strategies in digital age using value lens. In Proceedings of the 2020 International
Conference on Service Science and Innovation, Hsinchu, Taiwan, 15–17 October 2020; p. 33.
5. Bharadwaj, A.; El Sawy, O.A.; Pavlou, P .A.; Venkatraman, N. Digital business strategy: Toward a next generation of insights. MIS
Q.2013 ,37, 471–482. [CrossRef]
6. Trattner, A.; Hvam, L.; Forza, C.; Herbert-Hansen, Z.N.L. Product complexity and operational performance: A systematic
literature review. CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol. 2019 ,25, 69–83. [CrossRef]
7. Rodr /acute.ts1Iguez, P .; Haghighatkhah, A.; Lwakatare, L.E.; Teppola, S.; Suomalainen, T.; Eskeli, J.; Karvonen, T.; Kuvaja, P .; Verner, J.M.;
Oivo, M. Continuous deployment of software intensive products and services: A systematic mapping study. J. Syst. Softw. 2017 ,
123, 263–291. [CrossRef]
8. Tanniru, M.; Khuntia, J.; Weiner, J. Hospital leadership in support of digital transformation. Pac. Asia J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2018 ,10, 3.
[CrossRef]
9. Xu, B.; Xu, L.D.; Cai, H.; Xie, C.; Hu, J.; Bu, F. Ubiquitous data accessing method in IoT-Based information system for emergency
medical services. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2014 ,10, 1578–1586.
10. Masoro, E.J. Are age-associated diseases an integral part of aging? In Handbook of the Biology of Aging ; Masoro, E.J., Austad, S.N.,
Eds.; Academic Press: New York, NY, USA, 2006.
11. Levy, B. Stereotype embodiment: A psychosocial approach to aging. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2009 ,18, 332–336. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
12. WHO World Health Organization. Active Ageing: A Policy Framework ; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2002.
13. Doremus, B.L. The four R’s: Social diagnosis in health care. Health Soc. Work 1976 ,1, 120–139. [CrossRef]
14. Jarzabek, S.; Cheong, K.; Lim, Y.W.; Wong, J.C.M.; Kayanoth, R.K.; Teng, J.Y. CBT assistant platform: Web/mobile co-design
solution for cognitive behavioral therapy. J. Hosp. Manag. Health Policy 2018 ,2, 34. [CrossRef]
15. Sendler, D.J. Combining standard psychiatric care with e-health follow up solutions—A viewpoint on making psychiatric care
cost-effective for millions of patients and professionally satisfactory for providers. J. Hosp. Manag. Health Policy 2018 ,2, 40.
[CrossRef]
16. Chiauzzi, E.; Rodarte, C.; DasMahapatra, P . Patient-centered activity monitoring in the self-management of chronic health
conditions. BMC Med. 2015 ,13, 77. [CrossRef]
17. Khuntia, J.; Yim, D.; Tanniru, M.R.; Lim, S. Patient empowerment and engagement with a health infomediary. In Health Policy
Technology ; Elsevier: New York, NY, USA, 2017; Volume 6, pp. 40–50.
18. Mulders, O.J. Employers’ age-related norms, stereotypes and ageist preferences in employment. Int. J. Manpow. 2019 ,41, 523–534.
[CrossRef]Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 19 of 22
19. Serrat, R.; Warburton, J.; Petriwskyj, A.; Villar, F. Political participation and social exclusion in later life: What politically active
seniors can teach us about barriers to inclusion and retention. Int. J. Ageing Later Life 2018 ,12, 53–88. [CrossRef]
20. Gagliardi, C.; Pillemer, K.; Gambella, E.; Piccinini, F.; Fabbietti, P . Beneﬁts for older people engaged in environmental volunteering
and socializing activities in city parks: Preliminary results of a program in Italy. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3772.
[CrossRef]
21. WHO. Healthy Settings: Healthy Cities ; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2019.
22. WHO. Urban Green Spaces: A Brief for Action ; WHO Regional Ofﬁce for Europe: Copenhagen, Danmark, 2017.
23. WHO. Physical Activity Strategy for the WHO European Region 2016–2025 ; WHO Regional Ofﬁce for Europe: Copenhagen, Danmark,
2016.
24. Foster, L.; Walker, A. Active and successful aging: A European policy perspective. Gerontologist 2015 ,55, 83–90. [CrossRef]
25. Serrat, R.; Scharf, T.; Villar, F.; G ómez, C. Fifty-ﬁve years of research into older people’s civic participation: Recent trends, future
directions. Gerontologist 2020 ,60, e38–e51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Principi, A.; Jensen, P .H.; Lamura, G. (Eds.) Active Ageing: Voluntary Work by Older People in Europe ; The Policy Press: Bristol, UK,
2014.
27. Walker, A. A strategy for active ageing. Int. Soc. Secur. Rev. 2002 ,55, 121–139. [CrossRef]
28. Darley, S. Learning as a process of personal-social transformation: Volunteering activity in health and social care charities. Mind
Cult. Act. 2018 ,25, 199–215. [CrossRef]
29. Van Ingen, E.; Wilson, J. I Volunteer, Therefore I am? Factors Affecting Volunteer Role Identity. Nonproﬁt Volunt. Sect. Q. 2016 ,46.
[CrossRef]
30. OECD. SMEs, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 2010 ; OECD Publishing: Paris, France, 2010; pp. 185–215.
31. Peredo, A.M.; McLean, M. Social entrepreneurship: A critical review of the concept. J. World Bus. 2006 ,41, 56–65. [CrossRef]
32. Relationship-Based Home Care: A Sustainable Solution for Europe’s Elder Care Crisis ; Global Coalition on Aging: New York, NY, USA,
2018; pp. 1–36.
33. Bom, J.; Bakx, P .; Schut, F.; van Doorslaer, E. The impact of informal caregiving for older adults on the health of various types of
caregivers: A systematic Review. Gerontologist 2019 ,59, e629–e642. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Chan, E.Y.Y.; Gobat, N.; Kim, J.H.; Newnham, E.A.; Huang, Z.; Hung, H.; Dubois, C.; Hung, K.K.C.; Lai, Y.; Wong, E.; et al.
Informal home care providers: The forgotten health-care workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet 2020 ,395, 1957–1959.
[CrossRef]
35. Williams, F.; Moghaddam, N.; Ramsden, S.; de Boos, D. Interventions for reducing levels of burden amongst informal carers of
persons with dementia in the community. A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Aging Ment.
Health 2019 ,23, 1629–1642. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Phillips, D.; Paul, G.; Fahy, M.; Dowling-Hetherington, L.; Kroll, T.; Moloney, B.; Duffy, C.; Fealy, G.; Lafferty, A. The invisible
workforce during the COVID-19 pandemic: Family carers at the frontline. Hrb. Open Res. 2020 ,3, 24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Tur-Sinai, A.; Teti, A.; Rommel, A.; Hlebec, V .; Lamura, G. How many older informal caregivers are there in Europe? Comparison
of estimates of their prevalence from three european surveys. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 9531. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
38. Bryant, J.; Mansﬁeld, E.; Boyes, A.W.; Waller, A.; Sanson-Fisher, R.; Regan, T. Involvement of informal caregivers in supporting
patients with COPD: A review of intervention studies. Int. J. Chronic Obstr. Pulm. Dis. 2016 ,11, 1587–1596. [CrossRef]
39. Fiest, K.M.; McIntosh, C.J.; Demiantschuk, D.; Leigh, J.P .; Stelfox, H.T. Translating evidence to patient care through caregivers: A
systematic review of caregiver-mediated interventions. BMC Med. 2018 ,16, 105. [CrossRef]
40. Kaschowitz, J.; Brandt, M. Health effects of informal caregiving across Europe: A longitudinal approach. Soc. Sci. Med. 2017 ,173,
72–80. [CrossRef]
41. Litwin, H.; Stoeckel, K.J.; Roll, A. Relationship status and depressive symptoms among older co-resident caregivers. Aging Ment.
Health 2014 ,18, 225–231. [CrossRef]
42. Pinquart, M.; Sörensen, S. Spouses, adult children, and children-in-law as caregivers of older adults: A meta-analytic comparison.
Psychol. Aging 2011 ,26, 1–14. [CrossRef]
43. Goll, J.C.; Charlesworth, G.; Scior, K.; Stott, J. Barriers to social participation among lonely older adults: The inﬂuence of social
fears and identity. PLoS ONE 2015 ,13, e0201510. [CrossRef]
44. Biggs, S. Toward critical narrativity. Stories of aging in contemporary social policy. J. Aging Stud. 2011 ,15, 303–316. [CrossRef]
45. Plum, A.; Tanniru, M.; Khuntia, J. An Innovation Platform for Diffusing Public Health Practices across a Global Network ; HICSS: Hawaii,
HI, USA, 2019.
46. Tanniru, M. Engagement leading to empowerment—Digital innovation strategies for patient care continuity. J. Hosp. Manag.
Health Policy 2019 ,3, 28. [CrossRef]
47. HOPE. Available online: http://www.hopewarmingpontiac.org/ (accessed on 14 May 2021).
48. Williams, D.R.; Costa, M.V .; Odunlami, A.O.; Mohammad, S.A. Moving upstream: How Interventions that address the social
determinants of health can improve health and reduce disparities. J. Public Health Manag. Pract. 2008 ,14, S8–S17. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
49. Boccia, S.; Ricciardi, W.; Ioannidis, A.J.P . What other countries can learn from italy during the COVID-19 pandemic. JAMA Intern.
Med. 2020 ,180, 927–928. [CrossRef]Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 20 of 22
50. Armitage, R.; Nellums, L.B. COVID-19 and the consequences of isolating the elderly. Lancet Public Health 2020 ,5, e256. [CrossRef]
51. Hwang, T.J.; Rabheru, K.; Peisah, C.; Reichman, W.; Ikeda, M. Loneliness and Social Isolation during the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Int. Psychogeriatr. 2020 ,32, 1–15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Rolandi, E.; Vaccaro, R.; Abbondanza, S.; Casanova, G.; Pettinato, L.; Colombo, M.; Guaita, A. Loneliness and social engagement
in older adults based in lombardy during the COVID-19 lockdown: The long-term effects of a course on social networking sites
use. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 7912. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Santini, Z.I.; Jose, P .E.; Cornwell, E.Y.; Koyanagi, A.; Nielsen, L.; Hinrichsen, C.; Meilstrup, C.; Madsen, K.R.; Koushede, V .
Social disconnectedness, perceived isolation, and symptoms of depression and anxiety among older Americans (NSHAP): A
longitudinal mediation analysis. Lancet Public Health 2020 ,5, e62–e70. [CrossRef]
54. Sala, E.; Gaia, A.; Cerati, G. The gray digital divide in social networking site use in Europe: Results from a quantitative study. Soc.
Sci. Comput. Rev. 2020 . [CrossRef]
55. Yu, R.P .; Ellison, N.B.; McCammon, R.J.; Langa, K.M. Mapping the two levels of digital divide: Internet access and social network
site adoption among older adults in the USA. Inf. Commun. Soc. 2016 ,19, 1445–1464. [CrossRef]
56. Mesk ó, B.Z.; Drobni, Z.; B ényei, E.; Gergely, B.; Gy˝ orffy, Z. Digital health is a cultural transformation of traditional healthcare.
mHealth 2017 ,3, 38. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Grant, R.W.; Wald, J.S.; Schnipper, J.L. Practicelinked online personal health records for type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized
controlled trial. Arch. Intern. Med. 2008 ,168, 1776–1782. [CrossRef]
58. Tuil, W.S.; C M Verhaak, D.D.; de Vries Robb é, P .F.; Kremer, J.A.M. Empowering patients undergoing in vitro fertilization by
providing Internet access to medical data. Fertil. Steril. 2007 ,88, 361–368. [CrossRef]
59. Wagner, P .; Dias, J.; Shalon, H.; Kintziger, K.W.; Hudson, M.F.; Seol, Y.H.; Sodomka, P . Personal health records and hypertension
control: A randomized trial. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 2012 ,19, 626–634. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. MHU. Mobile Clinic. Available online: https://publichealth.arizona.edu/outreach/primary-prevention-mobile-health-unit
(accessed on 14 May 2021).
61. Haggstrom, D.A.; Saleem, J.J.; Russ, A.L.; Jones, J.; Russell, S.A.; Chumbler, N.R. Lessons learned from usability testing of the
VA’s personal health record. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 2011 ,18, i13–i17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Keefe, F.J.; Huling, D.A.; Coggins, M.J.; Keefe, D.F.; Rosenthal, M.Z.; Herr, N.R.; Hoffman, H.G. Virtual reality for persistent pain:
A new direction for behavioral pain management. Pain 2012 ,153, 2163–2166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Mosadeghi, S.; Reid, M.W.; Martinez, B.; Rosen, B.T.; Spiegel, B.M.R. Feasibility of an immersive virtual reality intervention for
hospitalized patients: An observational cohort study. JMIR Ment. Health 2016 ,3, e28. [CrossRef]
64. Fadel, K.; Brown, S.; Tanniru, M. A theoretical framework for knowledge transfer in process redesign. Data Base 2008 ,39, 21–40.
[CrossRef]
65. Pwc. Available online: https://www.sleepreviewmag.com/uncategorized/pwc-research-resmeds-myair-signiﬁcantly-improves-
adherence-cpap-therapy/ (accessed on 14 May 2021).
66. Timms, K.P .; Rivera, D.E.; Collins, L.M.; Piper, M.E. A dynamical systems approach to understanding self-regulation in smoking
cessation behavior change. Nicotine Tob. Res. 2014 ,16(Suppl. 2), S159–S168. [CrossRef]
67. Yu, K.-H.; Beam, A.L.; Kohane, I.S. Artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2018 ,2, 719–731. [CrossRef]
68. Tanniru, M.; Jones, J.; Kazziha, S.; Hornberger, M. Strategies to address care transition—A methodology and a case study. J. Hosp.
Adm. 2019 ,8, 38.
69. Khuntia, J.; Tanniru, M.; Weiner, J. Juggling digitization and technostress: The case of alert fatigues due to intelligent care system
implementation at a hospital. Healthc. Policy Technol. 2015 ,4, 364–377. [CrossRef]
70. Agarwal, R.; Tanniru, M.; Wilemon, D. Assimilating information technology innovations: Strategies and moderating inﬂuences.
IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 1997 ,44, 358. [CrossRef]
71. Khuntia, J.; Tanniru, M.; Fragoli, F.; Nawrocki, M. Mindfulness differences in hospital unit operations: Analysis of response to
nurse call systems. Pac. Asia J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2016 ,8, 33–36.
72. McCradden, M.D.; Joshi, S.; Mazwi, M.; Anderson, J.A. Ethical Limitations of Algorithmic Fairness Solutions in Health Care Machine
Learning ; Elsevier: New York, NY, USA, 2020; Volume 2.
73. Wenger, N.K. Cardiovascular disease: The female heart is vulnerable. A call to action from the 10Q Report. Clin. Cardiol. 2012 ,35,
134–135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Friedler, S.A.; Scheidegger, C.; Venkatasubramanian, S. On the (Im)possibility of Fairness. Available online: https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1609.07236.pdf (accessed on 23 September 2019).
75. Barocas, S.; Hardt, M.; Narayanan, A. Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations and Opportunities. 2018. Available online:
https://fairmlbook.org/ (accessed on 6 December 2019).
76. Dearing, J.W.; Smith, D.K.; Larson, R.S.; Estabrooks, C.A. Designing for diffusion of a biomedical intervention. Am. J. Prev. Med.
2013 ,44, S70–S76. [CrossRef]
77. Endsley, M.R. Designing for Situation Awareness: An Approach to User-Centered Design , 2nd ed.; CRC Press, Inc.: Boca Raton, FL,
USA, 2011.
78. Agarwal, A.; Tanniru, M. Assessing organizational impacts of technology. Int. J. Technol. Manag. 1992 ,7, 626–643. [CrossRef]Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 21 of 22
79. Grifﬁths, F.; Watkins, J.A.; Huxley, C.; Harris, B.; Cave, J.; Pemba, S.; Chipwaza, B.; Lilford, R.; Ajisola, M.; Arvanitis, T.N.;
et al. Mobile consulting (mConsulting) and its potential for providing access to quality healthcare for populations living in
low-resource settings of low- and middle-income countries. Digit. Health 2020 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Jansen, S.; Cusumano, M.A.; Popp, K.M. Managing software platforms and ecosystems. IEEE Softw. 2019 ,36, 17–21. [CrossRef]
81. Basole, R.C.; Park, H. Interﬁrm collaboration and ﬁrm value in software ecosystems: Evidence from cloud computing. IEEE Trans.
Eng. Manag. 2019 ,66, 368–380. [CrossRef]
82. Basole, R.C.; Russell, M.G.; Huhtamaki, J.; Rubens, N.; Still, K.; Park, H. Understanding business ecosystem dynamics: A
data-driven approach. ACM Trans. Manag. Inf. Syst. 2015 ,6, 1–32. [CrossRef]
83. Kumara, J.; Han, A.; Colman, W.; van den Heuvel, W.; Tamburri, D.A. Runtime evolution of multi-tenant service networks. In
Proceedings of the Service Oriented and Cloud Computing—7th IFIP WG 2.14 European Conference; Proceedings, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, ESOCC, Como, Italy, 12–14 September 2018; Kritikos, K., Plebani, P ., Paoli, F.D., Eds.; Springer: New
York, NY, USA, 2018; Volume 11116, pp. 33–48.
84. de Vasconcelos Gomes, L.A.; Facin, A.L.F.; Salerno, M.S.; Ikenami, R.K. Unpacking the innovation ecosystem construct: Evolution,
gaps and trends. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2018 ,136, 30–48. [CrossRef]
85. Nguyen, L.H.; Thu, V .G.; Ha, G.H.; Nguyen, C.T.; Vu, H.M.; Nguyen, T.Q.; Tran, T.H.; Pham, K.T.H.; Latkin, C.A.; Tran, B.X.; et al.
Fear of falling among older patients admitted to hospital after falls in vietnam: Prevalence, associated factors and correlation
with impaired health-related quality of life. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 2493. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Scheffer, A.C.; Schuurmans, M.J.; van Dijk, N.; van der Hooft, T.; de Rooij, S.E. Fear of falling: Measurement strategy, prevalence,
risk factors and consequences among older persons. Age Aging 2006 ,37, 19–24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Cumming, R.G.; Salkeld, G.; Thomas, M.; Szonyi, G. Prospective study of the impact of fear of falling on activities of daily living,
SF-36 scores, and nursing home admission. J. Gerontol. Ser. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2000 ,55, M299–M305. [CrossRef]
88. Chamberlin, M.E.; Fulwider, B.D.; Sanders, S.I.; Medeiros, J.M. Does fear of falling inﬂuence spatial and temporal gait parameters
in elderly persons beyond changes associated with normal aging? J. Gerontol. Ser. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2005 ,60, 1163–1167.
[CrossRef]
89. Deshpande, N.; Metter, E.J.; Bandinelli, S.; Lauretani, F.; Windham, B.G.; Ferrucci, L. Psychological, physical, and sensory
correlates of fear of falling and consequent activity restriction in the elderly: The InCHIANTI study. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil.
2008 ,87, 354–362. [CrossRef]
90. Chaccour, K.; Darazi, R.; Hassani, A.H.E.; Andres, E. From fall detection to fall prevention: A generic classiﬁcation of fall-related
systems. IEEE Sens. J. 2017 ,17, 812–822. [CrossRef]
91. Habib, M.; Mohktar, M.; Kamaruzzaman, S.; Lim, K.; Pin, T.; Ibrahim, F. Smartphone-based solutions for fall detection and
prevention: Challenges and open issues. Sensors 2014 ,14, 7181–7208. [CrossRef]
92. Julayanont, P .; Phillips, N.; Chertkow, H.; Nasreddine, Z.S. Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA): Concept and Clinical Review.
InCognitive Screening Instruments: A Practical Approach ; Springer: London, UK, 2012; pp. 111–151.
93. Shao, S.; Tunc, C.; Al-Shawi, A.; Hariri, S. Autonomic Author Identiﬁcation in Internet Relay Chat (IRC). In Proceedings of
the IEEE/ACS 15th International Conference on Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA), Aqaba, Jordan, 28 October–1
November 2018.
94. Ahmad, M.; Amin, M.; Hussain, S.; Kang, B.; Cheong, T.; Lee, S. Health fog: A novel framework for health and wellness
applications. J. Supercomput. 2016 ,72, 3677–3695. [CrossRef]
95. Kumar, T.; Braeken, A.; Liyanage, M.; Ylianttila, M. Identity privacy preserving biometric based authentication scheme for Naked
healthcare environment. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Paris, France, 21–25
May 2017.
96. Pacheco, J.; Hariri, S. IoT security framework for smart cyber infrastructures. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 1st International
Workshops on Foundations and Applications of Self* Systems (FAS*W), Augsburg, Germany, 12–16 September 2016; pp. 242–247.
[CrossRef]
97. Gu, X.; Li, M.; Cao, Y.; Xiong, L. Supporting both range queries and frequency estimation with local differential privacy. In
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security (CNS), Washington, DC, USA, 10–12 June
2019.
98. Tremblay, K. Healthcare @ The Speed of Thought: A digital world needs successful transformative leaders. Healthc. Manag.
Forum. 2017 ,30, 246–251. [CrossRef]
99. Christensen, C.M.; Bohmer, R.; Kenagy, J. Will disruptive innovation cure healthcare? Harv. Bus. Rev. 2020 ,78, 102–112.
100. Schein Edgar, H. Coming to a new awareness of organizational culture. Sloan Manag. Rev. 1984 ,25, 3.
101. Uhl-Bien, M.; Marion, R.; McKelvey, B. Complexity leadership theory: Shifting leadership from the industrial age to the
knowledge era. In Leadership, Gender, and Organization ; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2011; pp. 109–138.
102. Cressman, D. A Brief Overview of Actor-Network Theory: Punctualization, Heterogeneous Engineering & Translation. 2009.
Available online: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Brief-Overview-of-Actor-Network-Theory%3A-%26-Cressman/
09312181b176e8a32b1fc0cd7c1510cbcf98a57f (accessed on 7 April 2021).
103. Fadhil, A.; Gabrielli, S. Addressing challenges in promoting healthy lifestyles. In Proceedings of the 11th EAI International
Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare, PervasiveHealth 17, Barcelona, Spain, 23–26 May 2017.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 5686 22 of 22
104. Babylon Health. The Online Doctor and Prescription Services App, Babylon Health. 2019. Available online: https://www.
babylonhealth.com (accessed on 5 August 2019).
105. Buoy Health. Check Symptoms & Find the Right Care. Available online: https://www.buoyhealth.com/ (accessed on 7 April
2021).
106. Chung, K.; Park, R.C. Chatbot-based healthcare service with a knowledge base for cloud computing. Clust. Comput. 2019 ,22,
1925–1937. [CrossRef]
107. Comendador, B.E.V .; Francisco, B.M.B.; Medenilla, J.S.; Nacion, S.M.T.; Serac, T.B.E. Pharmabot: A Pediatric Generic Medicine
Consultant Chatbot. J. Autom. Control Eng. 2015 ,3, 137–140. [CrossRef]
108. Microsoft Health Bot Project. AI At Work for Your Patients, Microsoft Research. 2019. Available online: https://www.microsoft.
com/en-us/research/project/health-bot/ (accessed on 7 April 2021).
109. IBM Watson Health. AI Healthcare Solutions, IBM Watson Health. 2019. Available online: https://www.ibm.com/watson-health
(accessed on 7 April 2021).