See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/3329270
Low-noise MEMS vibration sensor for geophysical applications
Article    in  Journal of Micr oelectr omechanic al Syst ems  · Januar y 2000
DOI: 10.1109/84.809058  · Sour ce: IEEE Xplor e
CITATIONS
132READS
701
4 author s, including:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
DARP A N- Zero View pr oject
Epo xy curing char acterization  View pr oject
Jonathan Bernst ein
Draper Labor atory
66 PUBLICA TIONS    1,973  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Raanan Miller
Massachuse tts Instit ute of T echnolog y
66 PUBLICA TIONS    3,326  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Jonathan Bernst ein on 10 F ebruar y 2015.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.JOURNAL OF MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, DECEMBER 1999 433
Low-Noise MEMS Vibration Sensor
for Geophysical Applications
Jonathan Bernstein, Member, IEEE, Raanan Miller, William Kelley, and Paul Ward, Member, IEEE
Abstract— The need exists for high-sensitivity, low-noise vibra-
tion sensors for various applications, such as geophysical datacollection, tracking vehicles, intrusion detectors, and underwaterpressure gradient detection. In general, these sensors differ fromclassical accelerometers in that they require no direct currentresponse, but must have a very low noise ﬂoor over a requiredbandwidth. Theory indicates a capacitive micromachined sili-con vibration sensor can have a noise ﬂoor on the order of100 ng/
/112
/72/122over 1-kHz bandwidth, while reducing size and
weight tenfold compared to existing magnetic geophones. Withearly prototypes, we have demonstrated Brownian-limited noise
ﬂoor at 1.0
/22g//112
/72/122 /59orders of magnitude more sensitive than
surface micromachined devices such as the industry standardADXL05. [376]
Index Terms— Acceleration measurement, capacitance trans-
ducers, geophysical measurements, microelectromechanical de-vices, micromachining.
I. INTRODUCTION
AVIBRATION sensor can be thought of as a very high-
sensitivity accelerometer with no direct current (dc)
output requirement. With no drift or bias stability speci-ﬁcations, the design can be optimized to give the lowest
noise ﬂoor. Applications for these devices include geophysical
sensing, machinery vibration and failure prediction, trackingand identiﬁcation of vehicles or personnel, and underwaterpressure gradient sensing.
Traditional vibration sensors using permanent magnets and
ﬁne wire coils are called geophones,
1which measure veloc-
ityabove the fundamental resonance. This is in contrast to
capacitive accelerometers that measure acceleration below
their fundamental resonance. Piezoelectric and ferroelectric
accelerometers are also used for these applications. Micro-machined sensors can offer size and weight advantages overtraditional sensors.
Previous efforts to make micromachined high-resolution
vibration sensors or accelerometers have included capacitive[1]–[3], tunneling [4], [5], piezoresistive, optical, and piezo-
electric sensors. Capacitive sensors have the advantage of no
exotic materials, low noise, and compatibility with CMOSreadout electronics. Tunneling sensors have a low noise ﬂoor,
Manuscript received August 8, 1998; revised June 14, 1999. This paper
was presented in part at the Transducers Research Foundation Hilton Head
Workshop on Solid-State Sensor and Actuators, Hilton Head, SC, 1998.
Subject Editor, S. Tabata.
The authors are with the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, MA
02139-3563 USA
Publisher Item Identiﬁer S 1057-7157(99)09609-2.
1Geospace, Inc., GS-14 geophone, Houston, TX 77040 USA.but due to the small allowable displacement at the tip require a
very stiff feedback loop, which reduces the useful bandwidth
and dynamic range.
II. THEORY
Thesensor ismodeledas aspring-mass-dampersystemwith
capacitive pickoff. Because no dc output is required, it was
decided forinitial teststo build a single-capacitor sensor ratherthan a differential capacitor design. Noise sources modeledinclude Brownian mechanical noise from air damping and
electronic noise from the readout circuit [6].
The Brownian force is
Hz[6], which
causes Brownian motion of the proof mass
mHz (1)
where is the damping coefﬁcient of the proof mass
supported by spring constant Solving for the acceleration
which generates the same motion and substituting
and m/sgives for
Brownian equivalent acceleration noise in g/ Hz
gHz(2)
From (2), we see that a large mass and high (low
damping) are helpful to achieve a low noise ﬂoor. To achievea large mass in a micromachined sensor, one typically uses awafer-thick proof mass carved from the sensor chip.
In order to use a sensor with a high
, it must be force-
rebalanced to prevent ringing at the resonant frequency. Inthe work presented here, the sensors are overdamped, with a
of about 0.3. A vacuum package is typically necessary to
achieve very high 10000).
The sensitivity of the device is calculated for the simple
case of a dc bias voltage with a high-input impedance bufferampliﬁer. A bias voltage of
the snap-down voltage
is assumed. The sensitivity at low frequency is the
volts/meter in the sense gap times the meters/g of the proofmass well below resonance
V/g (3)
The snap-down voltage is where
is the capacitor sense gap and is the capacitor area.
1057–7157/99$10.00 1999 IEEE434 JOURNAL OF MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, DECEMBER 1999
Fig. 1. Total noise in decibels referenced to 1 g//112
Hz /59as a function of /81
and front-end electrical noise.
Substituting for the mass andgives for sensitivity
V/g (4)
whereis the proof mass thickness, and is the density
of silicon. From this, we see that sensitivity is inverselyproportional to the fundamental resonant frequency.
We consider also an electronic readout noise component,
which has (in general) equivalent input current noise and
voltagenoise components.Thetotalequivalentfront-endnoiseis called
This voltage noise can be converted to an equiv-
alent acceleration noise in ’s by dividing by the transducer
sensitivity in volts per gram (V/g)
gHz (5)
The total noise is the rms combination of electrical and
Brownian contributions
g/Hz (6)
Voltage noise for a low-noise CMOS front end is typically
in the 5–10-nV/ Hz range above the corner. Lower
noise can be obtained, but at the cost of increased currentconsumption.
To achieve a noise level of 10 ng, a vacuum package must
be used to reduce Brownian motion noise.
Fig. 1 is a contour map of combined g-equivalent noise as
a function of electrical noise (1 nV to 100 nV/
Hzand(1
to 10The decibel scale on the map is decibels referenced
to 1 g/Hzhence g/Hz corresponds to 160 dB. To
achieve a noise level of 10 ng/ Hz requires a of 3000
and a front-end equivalent noise of under 2 nV/ HzFor this
calculation, the silicon proof mass is assumed to be 4 mm
4m m 0.38 mm with a resonant frequency of 1 kHz.
Table I lists the design goals for the three resonant frequen-
cies of the fabricated devices.
III. ELECTRONICS DESIGN
To evaluate the vibration sensor prototypes, two types of
electronics were used: an open-gate JFET source followerand a custom CMOS application-speciﬁed integrated circuitTABLE I
DESIGNGOALS FOR MICROMACHINED VIBRATION SENSOR
Fig. 2. Open-gate JFET buffer circuit.
(ASIC) fabricated at Orbit Semiconductor.2The JFET buffer
allowed quick, reasonably low noise measurements to be
made with a very compact circuit (inside the sensor package),
although and current noise are high at low frequencies.
The ASIC uses a carrier to reduce noise, resulting in
better low-frequency performance.
Fig. 2 shows the open-gate JFET buffer circuit used. This
circuit has a dc input impedance of several teraohms, whichcombined with a typical sensor capacitance of 50 pF gives anRCtime constant of several minutes. To speed the approach
to the stable bias point, it was sometimes necessary to shine
light in the package. The light temporarily increases the JFETleakage current, thereby decreasing the impedance of the gatenode. This reset technique is sometimes used with nuclear
particle counters to reset a critical node without adding stray
capacitance and leakage current.
A custom CMOS mixed signal ASIC was designed in-house
and fabricated at Orbit Semiconductor. The design implements
synchronous modulation/demodulation using square waves
and a novel radio frequency (RF) rebalance technique. Theblock diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 3. The circuitrebalances the proof mass below the frequency range of
interest, while allowing higher frequency vibrations to move
the proof mass open-loop.
Equal andopposite 100-kHz square wavesare appliedto the
sensor and a reference capacitor. Vibrations cause a mismatch
between the ﬁxed capacitor and the time-varying sensor. The
charge ampliﬁer converts the capacitance mismatch into anoutput voltage which is then ampliﬁed by the alternatingcurrent (ac) gain stage.
2Orbit Semiconductor, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA.BERNSTEIN et al.: LOW-NOISE MEMS VIBRATION SENSOR 435
Fig. 3. CMOS ASIC block diagram.
The resulting vibration signal is amplitude modulated on a
100-kHz square wave carrier. The ampliﬁer stages process thissignal at 100 kHz to avoid
noise in the CMOS transistors.
The vibration signal is demodulated after ac ampliﬁcation to
recover the vibration signal. The output of the demodulator
is an error signal representing an acceleration or capacitancemismatch between the sensor and the reference capacitor. Thehigh frequency part of this signal is passed to an external low-
noise ampliﬁer. The low frequency part is integrated, inverted,
and low-pass ﬁltered to create the low and high carrier rails.The difference between the low and high rails represents thelow-frequency feedback used to force the sensor capacitance
back to the reference capacitor value. The modulator has three
inputs, the low and high rails, and the clock signal. The outputof this modulator is switched between the high and low rails
to create a variable amplitude square wave carrier, which is
applied to the sense capacitor. The square wave is inverted todrive the reference capacitor.
Application of ac voltage to the sensor applies a force pro-
portional to the square of the applied voltage amplitude. The
integral rebalance controller adjusts the carrier amplitude andtunes the time average sensor capacitance to match the ﬁxedreference capacitor. Under open loop operation, maximum g’s
are determined when the proof mass moves about 10% of
the sense gap. Closed-loop maximum g’s are determined bythe maximum available rebalance voltage, which is typicallylimited to some fraction of snap-down voltage.
The bandwidth of the rebalance loop is adjustable and was
selected to be low
1 Hz). The rebalance loop nulls dc and
sub 1-Hz accelerations maintaining signal null with changes intemperature and sensor orientation. This allows high gain for
ac signals and avoids saturation of the 5-V CMOS electronics.
Vibrations above 1 Hz are not rebalanced and are sensedopen-loop from the demodulator output.
IV. S
ENSORFABRICATION
The sensors are fabricated on 0.38-mm-thick double-side
polished wafers using the Bosch process in a surface tech-nology systems (STS) etcher. A recess 3-
m deep is etched
into the wafer to deﬁne anchors and create the sense gap. 30-
m-deep damping-relief trenches are then etched to reduce
squeeze-ﬁlm damping. A 10- m-thick boron diffusion is used
to create an etch stop layer on both faces of the wafer. After
electrostatic bonding to a glass wafer with readout electrodes,
the STS etcher is used to trench through the wafer. A briefanisotropic etch then undercuts the springs.
Fig. 4. Vibration sensor structure etched through the wafer (380 /22m), before
anisotropic etch.
Fig. 5. Corner of device showing electrodes and damping-reduction
trenches.
Fig. 6. Vibration sensor after anisotropic etching, leaving thin boron-dopedﬂexures supporting large proof mass.
Figs. 4 and 5 show a sensor chip after the deep inductively
coupled plasma etch and before the anisotropic etch. A centralproof mass is supported by springs attached to four anchors on
a glass substrate. Damping-relief trenches are visible in Fig. 5
facing the glass substrate. Fig. 6 shows a completed prototypesensor.436 JOURNAL OF MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, DECEMBER 1999
TABLE II
TESTRESULTS FROM CMOS ASIC/V IBRATION SENSORINTEGRATION
Fig. 7.CVcurve. Capacitance varies 17 pF (22%) at 4-V bias.
Fig. 8. Frequency response of 3 mm /23 mm device, design resonance at
1 kHz, /81 /61/48 /58 /51 /58
Devices were designed and fabricated with three proof
mass sizes (3 mm 4m mand 5 mm ) and three resonant
frequencies (500 Hz, 1 kHz, and 10 kHz) to cover various
applications. Kovar ﬂat-packs were used to house the sensorswith internal (JFET) preamp or external (custom CMOSbuffer) readout circuit.
V. T
ESTRESULTS
Chipleveltestingincludes capacitance–voltage(CV) curves
(Fig. 7) and current–voltage curves to measure leakage resis-
tance (typically greater than 1 T ). Frequency response with
the open-gate JFET buffer is shown in Fig. 8. A sensitivity
Fig. 9. Plot of acceleration noise in g//112
Hz using source-follower buffer
circuit. Device is same as Fig. 8.
Fig. 10. Baseband versus synchronous modulation/demodulation noise with
Orbit CMOS ASIC readout chip.
of 42 mV/g was obtained at a bias voltage of 3.7 V. The
noise ﬂoor (measured on a vibration isolated platform) was1.5
g/Hz (Fig. 9), limited by Brownian noise for this over-
damped device. A battery powered low-noise pre-amp using
OP 37 op-amps was necessary to lift the signal level above
the noise ﬂoor of the HP 3563A dynamic signal analyzer fornoise measurements.
Fig. 10 shows the advantage of the RF carrier readout
chip over a baseband CMOS readout. Orders of magnitude
reduction in
noise are achieved at low frequencies using
this ASIC.BERNSTEIN et al.: LOW-NOISE MEMS VIBRATION SENSOR 437
TABLE III
VIBRATION SENSOR/ACCELEROMETER SURVEY
Table II summarizes test results using the CMOS ASIC,
including electrical noise, ac gain, theoretical noise, and mea-
sured noise ﬂoor. A noise ﬂoor of 1.0 g/Hz was achieved
with a 1-kHz nominal device, limited by Brownian noise.The predicted electrical noise ﬂoor was only 0.12
g/Hz
for this device. An electrical noise power spectral density of
0.4g/Hz was measured with the bias voltage turned down
to zero, which removes the Brownian motion component. Thehigher measured noise is due to higher than expected dampingand electrical voltage noise.
VI. D
ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Table III is a summary of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
and research vibration sensors about which information was
available. For each device, the bandwidth (BW), noise ﬂoor(NF), and aﬁgure of merit (FOM) aregiven (FOM
BW/NF).
This FOM is independent of the BW for a given family
of capacitive sensors, given constant electrical noise and the
relations between BW, sensitivity, and maximum bias voltage(which is a ﬁxed fraction of the snap-down voltage). One cansee from the table that the theoretical performance is 30 times
better than that of the best experimental devices, which are in
turn orders of magnitude better than current COTS devices.One can conclude that future devices will push down the
noise ﬂoor to well under 0.1
g/Hz with a 1-kHz sensing
bandwidth. At this sensitivity, they could replace geophonesin some applications.
In conclusion, a bulk micromachined vibration sensor has
been fabricated and tested with a novel, custom CMOS ASIC,
which removes
noise while requiring only a single sense
capacitor and one dummy capacitor. Vibration noise as low as1.5
g/Hz was achieved with a JFET buffered sensor and
1g/Hz using a custom CMOS ASIC. Theory indicates that
orders of magnitude improvements can be made over industrystandard COTS sensor in both bandwidth and noise ﬂoor bythe use of wafer-thick bulk micromachining technology with
3Centre Suisse d’Electronique et de Microtechnique SA (CSEM).optimized low-noise electronics. These sensors will be usefulfor geophysical work, machinery monitoring, and sensing ofvehicles and people.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Charles Stark Draper
Laboratory for supporting this work.
REFERENCES
[1] W.Henrion,L.DiSanza,M.Ip,S.Terry,andH.Jerman,“Widedynamic
rangedirectdigitalaccelerometer,”in Tech.Dig.1990Solid-StateSensor
and Actuator Workshop , Hilton Head Island, SC, June 4–7, 1990, pp.
153–157.
[2] K. Bult, A. Burstein, and D. Chang, “Wireless integrated microsensors,”
inProc. 1996 Hilton Head Solid State Sensor and Actuator Conf. , 1996,
pp. 205–210.
[3] M. Lemkin etal., “A 3-axis force balanced accelerometer using a single
proof mass,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators-
Transducers ’97 , Chicago IL, June 1977, pp. 1185–1188.
[4] C. H. Liu, J. D. Grade, A. M. Barzilai, K. K. Reynolds, A. Partridge,
J. J. K. Rockstad, and T. W. Kenney, “Characterization of a highly
sensitive tunneling accelerometer,” in Transducers’97Tech. Dig. , 1997,
pp. 471–472, paper 2B3.07.
[5] H. K. Rockalnd, T. W. Kenny, P. Kelley, and T. Gabrielson, “A micro-
fabricated electron-tunneling accelerometer as a directional underwater
acoustic sensor,” in Proc. Acoustic Particle Velocity Sensors: Design,
Performance, and Applications , 1996, pp. 57–68.
[6] T. B. Gabrielson, “Mechanical-thermal noise in micromachined acoustic
and vibration sensors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices , vol. 40, pp.
903–909.
Jonathan Bernstein (S’80–M’82) received the
B.S.E.E. degree with honors in engineering-physicsfrom Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, and the
M.S.E.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the University
of California at Berkeley. In addition, he received
National Science Foundation and Hertz Foundation
graduate fellowships.
Currently, he is with the Charles Stark Draper
Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, as the Task Leaderformicromechanicalacousticsensors(hydrophones,
microphone, and vibration sensors), accelerometers,
and advanced micromachined tuning-fork gyroscopes, in which capacity he
has designed, analyzed, and fabricated these transducers. He is responsible
for the process development for silicon monolithic sensors, including
single crystal silicon, polysilicon, PZT-on-Si, and electroformed metal
microstructures. He has also carried out process development to combine
on-chip JFET circuitry with these micromechanical sensors and PZT-on-
Silicon technology.
Dr. Bernstein has received Draper’s Distinguished Performance Award,
Best Invention Award (twice), and Best Publication Award.
Raanan Miller received the Ph.D. degree in elec-
trical engineering from the California Institute of
Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, CA, in 1997
Currently, he is with the Charles Stark Draper
Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, as a Senior Mem-
ber of the Technical Staff in the micromechanical
group. He is involved in process development fornext-generation MEMS gyroscopes and accelerom-
eters. In addition, he has designed, fabricated, and
tested a micromachined ﬁeld asymmetric ion mobil-
ity (FAIM) spectrometer for chemical warfare agent
detection.438 JOURNAL OF MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, DECEMBER 1999
William Kelley received the B.S.E.E. degree ( cum
laude) from Northeastern University, Boston, MA,
in 1991
Currently, he is with the Charles Stark Draper
Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, as a Senior Engineer
in the microelectronics group. He is the co-creatoron two patents: RF Balanced Capacitive Vibra-
tion Sensor System and Micromechanical Pressure
Gauge having Extended Sensor Range.
Mr. Kelley has received two Draper awards as
a member of the ASIC design team for First-Pass
Success. In addition, he has received an Outstanding Performance Award for
contributions to the development of the micromechanical gyro.
PaulWard (S’83–M’85)receivedtheB.S.andM.S.
degrees in electrical engineering from Northeastern
University, Boston, MA.
In 1985, he joined the Charles Stark Draper
Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, where he is currently
a Principal Engineer and Microelectronics GroupLeader. He is the principal engineer for Draper’s
micromachined gyroscope and accelerometer elec-
tronics, including application-speciﬁc integrated cir-
cuits (ASIC’s). He has been the principal electrical
engineer for many challenging projects, including
ppm-level radiation test systems, electron-spin and nuclear-magnetic reso-
nance precision signal references, resonator and interferometer ﬁber-opticgyroscopes, and most recently, micromechanical instrument electronics. He
holds 11 U.S. patents, has many patents pending, and has co-authored
numerous papers.
Mr. Ward is a member of Eta Kappa Nu and ARRL. He received the
1994 Draper Distinguished Performance Award along with others for their
work on the micromechanical gyroscope and electronics and the 1997 Draper
Distinguished Performance Award for his work on a commercially viable
yaw rate sensor instrument. In addition, he has received numerous Draper
Recognition Awards, as well as the 1996, 1997, and 1998 Best TechnicalPatent Awards.
View publication stats