994 IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 37, NO. 8, AUGUST 2002
A Noise Optimization Technique for Integrated
Low-Noise Amplifiers
Jung-Suk Goo , Member, IEEE , Hee-Tae Ahn , Member,IEEE , Donald J. Ladwig, Zhiping Yu , Senior Member,IEEE ,
Thomas H. Lee , Member, IEEE , and Robert W. Dutton , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Based on measured four-noise parameters and
two-port noise theory, considerations for noise optimization ofintegrated low-noise amplifier (LNA) designs are presented. Ifarbitrary values of source impedance are allowed, optimal noise
performance of the LNA is obtained by adjusting the source
degeneration inductance. Even for a fixed source impedance,the integrated LNA can achieve near
/109/105/110by choosing an
appropriatedevicegeometryalongwithanoptimalbiascondition.An 800-MHz LNA has been implemented in a standard 0.24-
m
CMOS technology. The amplifier possesses a 0.9-dB noise figurewith a 7.1-dBm third-order input intercept point, while drawing7.5 mW from a 2.0-V power supply, demonstrating that theproposed methodology can accurately predict noise performanceof integrated LNA designs.
Index Terms— Amplifier noise, induced gate noise, low-noise
amplifier, microwave amplifier, MOSFET amplifier, noise figure,random noise, semiconductor device noise.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE FIRST stage of a receiver is typically a low-noise
amplifier (LNA). The LNA design involves tradeoffs
between many figures of merit, such as gain, noise, power,
impedance matching, stability, and linearity. Since the primary
roleoftheLNAistolowertheoverallnoisefigureoftheentirereceiver, noise optimization is one of the most critical steps intheLNAdesignprocedure.Intraditionalmonolithicmicrowave
integrated circuit (MMIC) design, active devices are given
with fixed geometries and characteristics. For the given biasand frequency conditions, a source impedance
is selected
to minimize the noise figure [1]. Since the optimum source
impedance for noise ( ) differs from the power-match
conditionin general,thistechniqueoftenresults inlargepowerconsumption or input mismatching. Even in full custom ICs,despite an important option that the designer can choose the
desireddevicegeometries,mostdesignersstillrelyonthesame
optimization techniques [2]–[4] because no explicit guidanceis generally available on how to best exercise the IC designer’sfreedom in tailoring device geometries. They can achieve
an optimum noise figure with acceptable input mismatching
ManuscriptreceivedJanuary23,2001;revisedApril15,2002.Thisworkwas
initiated by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Contract
Army-DABT63-94-C-0055 and supported by Texas Instruments Incorporated
through customized research under SRC Contract 99-NJ-695.
J.-S.GooiswithAdvancedMicroDevices,Sunnyvale,CA94088-3453USA
(e-mail: goojs@gloworm.stanford.edu).
H.-T. Ahn is with Qualcomm, San Diego, CA 92121-1714 USA.
D.J.LadwigiswithTexasInstrumentsIncorporated,Dallas,TX75243USA.Z.Yu,T.H.Lee,andR.W.DuttonarewiththeCenterforIntegratedSystems,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4075 USA.
Publisher Item Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2002.800956.(typically dB) but do not fully exploit the potential
of integrated LNAs. Recently proposed noise optimization
techniques for CMOS RF circuits permit greater flexibilityin the selection of device geometries as well as matchingelements and biasing conditions to minimize the noise figure
for a specified gain or power dissipation [5], [6]. However,
they use simplified small-signal models as well as constantnoise characteristics. These techniques also rely heavily onmathematical derivations that provide limited intuitive design
guidance.
This paper presents considerations for noise optimization
of LNAs based directly on measured noise parameters andtwo-port noise theory; the approach requires neither sophisti-
cated noise modeling nor circuit simulation to be used. All the
analyses arebased onMOSFET designs,butthe same method-ologycanbeappliedtootherICtechnologies,suchasBiCMOSor heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBT). Section II reviews
thebasicconceptofthenoisefigureandfour-noiseparameters.
It also discusses the intrinsic noise model of the MOSFET andits relation to the measured noise performance of amplifiers.Section III explains how the noise performance of the LNA
differs from that of the intrinsic device; design considerations
for a CMOS-tuned LNA with power constraints are presented.SectionIVpresentsexperimentalresultsforanimplementationusing integrated CMOS technology to realize an LNA.
II. F
UNDAMENTAL NOISETHEORY FOR CMOS C IRCUITS
A. Concept of the Four-Noise Parameters
The noise performance of a circuit is usually characterized
by a parameter called noise factor ()o rnoise figure (
) that represents how much the given system degrades
the signal-to-noise ratio [1].
(1)
TotalOutput Noise Power
Output Noise Power bySource Impedance(2)
Atonefrequency,thenoisefactorofalinearcircuitshowsapar-
abolic dependence on the source impedance driving the given
circuit. This behavior results in constant noise circles on the
Smith chart and can be characterized in terms of the four-noiseparameters [7] as follows:
(3)
0018-9200/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEEGOOet al.: NOISE OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUE FOR INTEGRATED LOW NOISE AMPLIFIERS 995
where istheminimumnoisefactor, andarerealand
imaginary parts, respectively, of the source admittance (
);and arerealandimaginaryparts,respectively,
oftheoptimumsourceadmittance( ,alsoknown
asthenoise-matchingcondition),and istheequivalentnoise
resistance. When is adjusted to , the circuit yields the
bestachievablenoiseperformance .Ifdiffersfrom ,
itsimpacton isamplifiedby .Evenif issufficiently
low, large and a poor proximity between andresult
in an unacceptably large noise figure in the actual circuit. Thisproblem becomes acute for MOSFET circuits because the re-
flection coefficient
1for optimum noise ( ) is nearly 1 and
is3–10timeslargerthanforhighelectronmobilitytransistor
(HEMT) devices [8].
B. High-Frequency Noise in MOSFETs
The thermal fluctuations of channel charge in the MOSFET
produceeffectsthataremodeledbydrainandgatecurrentnoise
generators[9].Thesecurrentsarepartiallycorrelatedwitheachotherbecausetheyshareacommonoriginandpossessaspectralpower given by
(4)
(5)
(6)
where is the drain output conductance under zero drain
bias, is the real part of gate-to-source
admittance,and ,,andarebias-dependentfactors.Forlong-
channel MOSFETs, ,, andare, respectively, 2/3, 4/3, and
0.395 in the saturation region, but short-channel MOSFETs
exhibitlargervalues[5],[10].Theseexpressionsimplythatthespectral power density scales with the device width
.
C. Scaling of the Noise Parameters
In realizing a custom IC design of the LNA, one of the key
issues is to understand the device scaling effects on the noise
parameters. The four-noise parameters can be derived2from
current noise spectral power, given in (4)–(6), as follows:
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Equation(7)suggeststhatdeviceswithshorterchannellength
yield better noise figures because the angular cutoff frequency
1Defined as /0 /61/40 /89 /0 /89 /41 /61 /40 /89 /43 /89 /41, where /89is the characteristic ad-
mittance of the transmission line.
2Exactexpressionscanbederivedbasedonthetwo-porttheory[11],[12].The
approximated (7)–(10) neglect the distributed and Miller effects. Their deriva-
tions are found in [10].is proportional to while becomes
at most 6.5 times larger than the long-channel case, down to0.25
m [6]. Likewise, (8) also suggests that shorter devices
improve . Therefore, the selection of device geometries for
theLNAdesignrequireswidthscalingofthedevice,consistentwiththeshortestchannellengththatcanberealized.In(7)–(10),
,,and scalelinearlywiththedevicewidth ,while
noisefactors ,,,andarewidthindependent.Theseresults
thus suggest the dependence of the four-noise parameters withrespect to the device width as follows:
no width dependence (11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Equations (3) and (12) imply that the larger device width
offersthebestchanceof loweringnoisefigure.Theupperlimitofthewidthissetbytheconstrainedpowerbudgetinintegrated
circuit implementations. When the supply voltage and power
consumption aregiven, the device width of the input stage cor-respondingtoeachbiasconditioncanbeeasilycalculatedfromthe current density. In other words, for a fixed drain current,
lower gate biasingallows a larger device width and higher gate
biasing demands to decrease the device width.
D. Noise Analysis of the Amplifier
This paper utilizes the two-port theory [11], [12] instead
of analytical equations. The four-noise parameters and
-parameters were measured from a 0.24- m nMOSFET with
m, using the ATN NP5B system. The frequency
range was from 0.5 to 6.0 GHz with 0.5-GHz step and the gate
and drain bias conditions were from 0.5 to 2.5 V with 0.2-Vstep, respectively. The resulting data were then smoothed forthe frequency as well as the bias dependences and used in the
following analyses. The tuned amplifier illustrated in Fig. 1(a)
is one of the most broadly used LNA architectures because itoffers the potential of achieving the best noise performance[5], [6], [10]. To evaluate its noise performance, the amplifier
isdivided intothree cascadingstagesas illustrated in Fig.1(b).
An admittance noise matrix for the first stage (
)i s
found from the following network parameters:
(15)
This noise matrix is then transformed to the represen-
tation ( ).
In the second stage, an noise matrix of
is obtained from the measured four-noise parameters and then
transformed to the impedance noise matrix ( ). The total
noiseofthesecondstage( )isthesumof andthe
oneforthesourceinductorcomponent( ).Asdoneforthe
first stage, an representation ( ) is obtained by a
transformation.
Finally, the noise matrix of the third stage ( )
is acquired from the four-noise parameters of the996 IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 37, NO. 8, AUGUST 2002
(a)
(b)
Fig.1. (a)TunedLNAarchitectureemployinginductivesourcedegeneration.
(b) Noise performance evaluation sequence for an amplifier.
common-gate-mode MOSFET. Alternatively, it can be ac-
quired through a conversion process presented in [13]. Note
that the noise contribution from needs to be subtracted
from the second stage and added to the third stage.
Thenoiseperformanceoftheentireamplifierisgivenbycas-
cading the three stages, as follows:
(16)
(17)
III. DESIGNCONSIDERATIONS FOR A TUNEDAMPLIFIER
For the topology illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the desired input
impedance of the amplifier is obtained for a narrow frequency
bandbychoosing andindependently.When ,itis
approximated as follows [5]:
(18)
Itisknownthatthesourcedegenerationinductance controls
the noise performance of the given architecture [14], but the
reasons are not well understood.
Supposeapowersupplyhavingaconjugatelymatchedsource
impedance isconnectedtotheLNAasillustratedinFig.1(a).
This can mean that and ,o r
thatandtransformagiven tobeconjugatelymatched
to. Assuming the noise from passive components is negli-
gible,basedonthedefinitionin(2),thenoisefactorofthegiventopology can be expressed as [6]
(19)
(20)
Fig. 2. Dependence of output noise power components on /60 /91 /90 /93where /90
istheinputimpedanceatthegateelectrodeof /77.Aconjugatepowermatchis
assumed.
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
where denotes the real part of a complex number, and
,, and arecurrent noise power components at the
output of the LNA contributed by ,, and , respec-
tively. In Fig. 2, the device size and bias condition are fixed,
then the impact of different are examined. The
result shows that each component has a different dependenceon
. Since the feedback of reduces the current gain,
asincreases, the output noise contributions from the source
resistance and the induced gate noise of
monotonically decrease, but their slopes are different due to
different feedback gains. On the other hand, the contributionfromtheinducedgatenoiseof
isnegligiblysmall.
Thecontributionsfromdraincurrentnoise( and )
have almost unity gain, and thus result in an -independent
term. Hence, the LNA yields the best noise figure whenthe
-dependent term ( ) and -independent term
( ) give equal contributions, as illustrated in
Fig. 2 by two dashed lines.
Thefour-noiseparametersofferamoreintuitivemeansofex-
planation for the phenomenon discussed above. The four-noiseGOOet al.: NOISE OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUE FOR INTEGRATED LOW NOISE AMPLIFIERS 997
(a)
(b)
Fig.3. NoiseperformanceoftheLNAforvarying /76.Thenoisecontributions
of /77substrate and /77are excluded and /67 /61/48. (a) Optimum source
impedance. (b) Noise figure.
parametersoftheLNAarecalculatedfordifferentvaluesof
using in Section II-D. Fig. 3(a) plots the power-
matching condition ( ) and noise-matching condi-
tion ( ) together on the Smith chart for varying
from 0.1 to 10 nH. As increases, the real part of pro-
portionally increases and the power-matching condition movesdownward counterclockwise. On the other hand,
dramati-
cally changes the noise-matching condition as well, but it ex-
hibits atotally independenttrajectorytothe left.Aninterestingfactisthatthosetwoconditionscancomeintoagoodproximitybyanappropriateamountofthesourcedegeneration.Sincethe
proximitymeans
innoiseperformancecalculation,
a better proximity essentially leads to a lower noise figure.
Fig. 3(b) shows the noise figure when the source impedance
() is chosen to providing a perfect power match. The
best achievable noise figure is obtained when brings
and to the point where they are in the closest proximity;
those conditions are marked as and in
Fig. 3(a). This fact implies that an accurate calculation of the
input impedance is critical in the noise optimization process;
approximate values are of limited use. Another beneficialimpact of using a source inductance is that it substantiallylowers
and slightly improves as well. Thus, the LNA
can potentially achieve a better noise figure than of the
MOSFET alone if coincides with .
Since isafunctionofthedevicesizeandbiascondition,
so is the optimum . Fig. 4(a) demonstrates the optimum
(a)
(b)
Fig.4. (a)Optimum /76yieldingthebestnoisefigureoftheLNAforthegiven
biasconditionunderthepowerconstraint.(b)BestnoisefigureoftheLNAwith
optimum /76.Thenoisecontributionsof /77substrateand /77areexcludedand
/67 /61/48.
isbias dependent and scales linearlywith the specifiedcurrent.
However,thenoisefigureachievedbyoptimizing isindepen-
dent of the current specification and very close to the intrinsic
, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
A. Input Transistor Optimization
To achieve for noise minimization, the designer
has two options. The first approach is to adjust the sourceimpedance to a predetermined
, which is set by a given
MOSFET. The other approach is to adjust to a prefixed
by changing the geometries of the transistors, primarily
the input device. The second option is very useful since thesource impedance has a fixed value of 50
in many RF
applications; also, the linearity specification often limits the
choice of , which sets the real part of the input impedance.
Thus,selection of theinput device is theprimary considerationin noise optimization of integrated circuits.
This section assumes that the source impedance is fixed to
50
andseekstheoptimumsizeoftheinputtransistor.Fordif-
ferentgatebiasrangingfrom0.6to1.5V,thewidthoftheinputdevice
with the shortest channel length is first adjusted to
satisfythegivenpowerconstraintateachgatebias.Tomakethe
LNAbeinapower-matchcondition,theinductor ischosento
providea50- realpartoftheinputimpedancefortheLNAand
thenthevalueof isadjustedtocanceloftheimaginarypartof
the input impedance. For better accuracy, the input impedance998 IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 37, NO. 8, AUGUST 2002
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig.5. Power-constrainednoiseperformanceof theLNAwhen /82 /61 /90 /61/53 /48 /10.Thenoise contributionsof /77substrateand /77areincludedand /67 /61/48.
(a) Optimum source impedance at /102 /61/52GHz. (b) Optimum source impedance at /102 /61 /56/48/48MHz. (c) Equivalent noise resistance. (d)Noise figure.
is calculated based on the methodology in [13]. In that case,
while the power-match condition is fixed to 50 , the
noise-match condition moves as shown in Fig. 5(a) and
(b).Asdiscussedintheprevioussection,theproximityof
to 50determines the noise figure. Even if somewhat
deviates from 50 , however, this deviation does not substan-
tially degrade the noise figure since the noise resistance of theLNAisreducedbyafactorofasmuchas5incomparisontotheMOSFET by itself, as shown in Fig. 5(c). In general, the cur-
rentspecificationdirectlyscalestheallowabledevicewidthand
loweringgatebiasgrantstousealargerdevicewidthforafixeddraincurrent.Asthenoiseresistanceisinverselyscaledwiththedevicewidth,itisevidentthathigherdraincurrentspecification
and lower gate biasing make the noise figure less sensitive to a
noise mismatch.
Fig.5(d)clearlyshowstheoptimumgatebiasfornoise.Italso
demonstrates that resulting noise figures are close to
.
The valley-shaped noise figure profile can be described by an
analytical expression as follows [6]:
(32)
The second and third terms include the drain conductance .
Since it is linearly scaled with the width, it becomes smaller
as the gate bias increases for a fixed current specification. Inthe second term,
suggests that this term originates from the
drain noise; in the numerator implies that this term is dom-inant when the gate bias is low due to width scaling. On the
otherhand,inthethirdterm, suggeststhatthistermoriginates
from the induced gate noise; in the denominator proposes
that this term is dominant when the gate bias is high. In otherwords, the given formula has two independent noise compo-
nentsthathavetheoppositegatebiasdependencetoeachother.
Thenoisefigurethushasminimawheretheycontributeequallytothenoise figure.This facthighlights theimportanceof accu-rate gate noise modeling for circuit design.
B. Cascode Stage Design
The cascode stage has a relatively small impact on the
overall noise figure if the input stage is not optimal. However,to squeeze out the best noise figure, it needs to be optimized as
well. In fact, in Fig. 5(d), the difference between the minima
of the noise figure valley and
is primarily limited by
the extra noise contribution from the cascode stage which isalso subject to the given power constraint. Thus, the second
step of the noise optimization is choosing a proper size for
the cascode stage. For the topology shown in Fig. 5(b),
exhibits a larger deviation from the power-match condition.It is caused not by the operating frequency, but by the poorly
optimized cascode stage. While it is known that increasing the
width of the cascode device monotonically improves shieldingfromtheoutput,itsimpactonthenoiseperformanceisnotwellunderstood.GOOet al.: NOISE OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUE FOR INTEGRATED LOW NOISE AMPLIFIERS 999
Fig. 6. Impact of the cascode transistor on the overall noise figure under the
power constraint. /82 /61 /90 /61/53 /48 /10.
Thebiasofthecascodestageistightlylinkedtoitssize.The
widthcanincreaseuntilthebiasofthecascodestageapproaches
the threshold voltage, or it can decrease until the input device
reaches the linear region. In this section, the gate bias and sizeof the input device is fixed to the optimum values found in
Fig. 5(d) and the width of the cascode stage device is swept
with the minimum channel length. The inductors
and
are readjusted to keep the input impedance to 50 . As the
width of the cascode stage ( ) increases, the generated noise
powerfromthecascodestagealsoincreases.Intuitively,thisfact
suggests that smaller improves the noise figure monotoni-
cally by reducing the noise contribution of as well as the
capacitanceattheintermediatenodebetween and.Due
totheMillereffect,however,therequired for
increases as becomes smaller. Consequently, smaller
yields a different noise-match condition as well as larger value
of. Eventually,the noise figure becomes worse if istoo
small.AnoptimalwidthexistsasshowninFig.6.Forthegiven
topology, with , the cascode stage introduces 40%
extra noise power to the input stage, which, in turn, increases
by about 0.5 dB.
C. Pad Capacitance
In the process of practical LNA design, as illustrated in
Fig. 1(a), the bonding pad introduces an extra ac current path
to ground. In silicon technology, this can severely deteriorate
the noise figure if the path contains a resistive component,such as the conductive substrate [15]. However, if the resistivecomponent is suppressed by replacing the bottom plate of the
pad capacitor from the substrate to a metal layer [15], the
bonding capacitance simply increases the required inductancevalue for the designated input impedance. This consequentlybrings the noise-match condition closer to
and also
diminishes the noise resistance further. In this section, the
input device optimization process presented in Section III-A isperformed again with the presence of the pad capacitance. Anarbitrary value
3ofis chosen first and then andare
adjusted to make . Fig. 7(a) and (b) demonstrates
that the bonding pad capacitance mitigates the strong gate
3This is a part of the design rules in many cases.
(a)
(b)
Fig.7. Power-constrainednoiseperformanceoftheLNAwhen /82 /61 /90 /61
/53/48 /10fordifferentpadcapacitance.Thenoisecontributionsof /77substrateand
/77are included. (a) Noise figure. (b) Gain.
bias dependence of the noise figure. However, it is a tradeoff
between the noise figure and gain.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To evaluate the LNA performance, a single-ended LNA in-
tended to achieve 1.0 dB of noise figure was designed using a
0.24-m silicideCMOStechnology. The diephoto ofthe LNA
isgiveninFig.8.First,theminimumsizepadwasimplementedusingmetal-5andmetal-1layerstosuppressextranoise,giving47fFofcapacitance.Thesupplyvoltagewaschosentobe2.0V
to provide a voltage headroom for the cascode transistor.
4The
analysis in Fig. 5(d) suggests that at least 3.75 mA of bias cur-rent is required to achieve below 1.0 dB of noise figure. Thegatebiaswassetto0.7Vtoachievethebestnoisefigurebased
onthecharacteristicinFig.7(a).Thecorrespondingsizeof
was 90/0.24 for the given power budget. At the time of design,
the cascode stage was not fully optimized and the size of
waschosentobe45/0.24.Forthegiventopology,itisexpected
to improve the noise figure by 0.1 dB with m. To
minimize the distributed gate resistance, the MOSFETs weresegmented into 5-
m-long gate fingers and each of the fingers
wascontactedatbothends[16].Thespiralinductor wasim-
plemented using the metal-5 layer and its value was chosen to
4The threshold voltage is relatively high in the given technology. Further
process adjustments can potentially reduce the supply voltage as well as the
power consumption.1000 IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 37, NO. 8, AUGUST 2002
Fig. 8. Die photo of the LNA.
Fig. 9. Wire-bonding illustration of the LLP package.
be 1.1 nH to provide 50 of real part of the input impedance,
in combination with . The inductor was designed based on
thecompactmodelpresentedby[17];apatternedgroundshieldwasemployedtoreducethesubstrateparasiticsofthespiralin-
ductor[18].Sincetherequiredgateinductor
tocanceloutthe
imaginary partof theinput impedance was 36nH, whichistoolargetobeintegrated,anexternalinductorwasusedalongwithabondwireinductor.Finally,tocontroltheparasiticinductance
from
to ground, the die was mounted on a special leadless
leadframe package (LLP) which allows direct downbonding tothe large ground plane, as shown in Fig. 9.
The complete schematic of the device under test (DUT) is
shown in Fig. 10. The real term of the input impedance of the
fabricated LNA was 54
and was adjusted to 50 using an
off-chip tuner. To maximize accuracy in noise figure measure-ment,theoutput oftheLNA isalso impedancematched
5using
another off-chip tuner.
Fig.11(a)and(b)showsmeasuredthird-orderinputintercept
point (IIP3) and noise figure as well as the available gain. Themeasured performance of the LNA is summarized in Table I.
With 3.75 mA of bias current, the LNA achieves about 0.9 dB
ofnoisefigure,whichisthelowestreportednoisefigurewithaperfect power match for a CMOS LNA, and it adds just 0.3 dBto the
of the intrinsic MOSFET device. The measured
noisefigureisalsoquiteclosetotheexpectedvalueanddemon-
strates that the proposed methodology accurately predicts thenoise performance of custom integrated LNA designs.
5If the output is not matched, the measured noise figure needs a correction
that may lead to errors [1].
Fig. 10. Complete schematic of the LNA, including off-chipelements.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11. Measured performance of the LNA. (a) IIP3 result. (b) Noise figure
and gain.
V. CONCLUSION
Based on the measured noise parameters of the 0.24- m
MOSFETandontheresultsderivedfromtwo-portnoisetheory,
considerations for a integrated LNA design are presented. The
measured noise parameters can be scaled directly with the de-vice width; device sizing can be utilized for power-constraineddesign. The noise performance of the tuned LNA is primarilycontrolled by the source degeneration inductance, whichGOOet al.: NOISE OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUE FOR INTEGRATED LOW NOISE AMPLIFIERS 1001
TABLE I
MEASURED PERFORMANCE OF AN 800-MH ZLNA
determines both the power-matching and the noise-matching
conditions. Therefore, if arbitrary values of source impedance
are allowed, the optimal LNA design can be obtained by
adjusting the source inductance. Even if the source impedanceis fixed, the integrated LNA can achieve noise performancenear
by choosing an appropriate device geometry and
optimizing the bias conditions. The cascode stage usually
introduces at least 40% extra noise power to the input stage;thus, its width needs to be optimized.
Although the demonstrated LNA uses a single-ended archi-
tecture, future LNA designs will require differential operation
since further scaling of the device sizes requires smaller values
of source inductance. Fully integrated inductors with largevalues and high quality factors required for
are an ongoing
challenge. The results demonstrate that CMOS can be a goodcandidateforhigh-performanceLNAdesigns,competitivewith
GaAs and bipolar LNAs.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Texas Instruments
Incorporated for promoting and mentoring this project. Specialthanks go to National Semiconductor for fabricating the chipand accommodating test equipment.
R
EFERENCES
[1] “Fundamentals of RF and microwave noise figure measurements,” Ag-
ilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, Application note 57-1.
[2] B. A. Floyd, J. Mehta, C. Gamero, and K. K. O, “A 900-MHz 0.8- /22m
CMOS low-noise amplifier with 1.2-dB noise figure,” in Proc. IEEE
Custom Integrated Circuits Conf. (CICC) , San Diego, CA, May 1999,
pp. 661–664.
[3] G. Gramegna, A. Magazzú, C. Sclafani, M. Paparo, and P. Erratico, “A
9-mW900-MHzCMOSLNAwith1.05-dBnoisefigure,”in Proc.Eur.
Solid-StateCircuitsConf.(ESSCIRC) ,Stockholm,Sweden,Sept.2000,
pp. 112–115.
[4] P. Leroux, J. Janssens, and M. Steyaert, “A 0.8-dB NF ESD-protected
9-mW CMOS LNA,” in Proc. Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC)
Dig. Tech. Papers , San Francisco, CA, Feb. 2001, pp. 410–411.
[5] D.K.Shaefferand T. H.Lee,“A1.5-V 1.5-GHzCMOSlow-noiseam-
plifier,”IEEE J.Solid-State Circuits ,vol. 32,pp. 745–759,May 1997.[6] J.-S. Goo, K.-H. Oh, C.-H. Choi, Z. Yu, T. H. Lee, and R. W. Dutton,
“Guidelinesforthepower-constraineddesignofaCMOStunedLNA,”
inProc. Int. Conf. Simulation of Semiconductor Processes and Devices
(SISPAD) , Seattle, WA, Sept. 2000, pp. 269–272.
[7] H. Rothe and W. Dahlke, “Theory of noisy fourpoles,” in Proc. Inst.
Radio Eng. , vol. 44, June 1956, pp. 811–815.
[8] G. Dambrine, J.-P. Raskin, F. Danneville, D. Vanhoenacker-Janvier,
J.-P. Colinge, and A. Cappy, “High-frequency four-noise parametersof silicon-on-insulator-based technology MOSFET for the design of
low-noise RF integrated circuits,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices , vol.
46, pp. 1733–1741, Aug. 1999.
[9] A. van der Ziel, Solid State Physical Electronics , 3rd ed. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1976, ch. 18.
[10] T. H. Lee, The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits ,
1st ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ.Press, 1998, ch. 11.
[11] H. A. Haus and R. B. Adler, Circuit Theory of Linear Noisy Net-
works. New York: Wiley, 1959.
[12] H.HillbrandandP.H.Russer,“Anefficientmethodforcomputer-aided
noiseanalysisoflinearamplifiernetworks,” IEEETrans.CircuitsSyst. ,
vol. 23, pp. 235–238, Apr. 1976.
[13] J.-S.Goo,H.-T.Ahn,D.J.Ladwig,Z.Yu,T.H.Lee,andR.W.Dutton,
“Design methodology for power-constrained low-noise RF circuits,” inProc.WorkshopSynthesisandSystemIntegrationofMixedTechnologies
(SASIMI) , Nara, Japan, Oct. 2001, pp. 394–401.
[14] Y. Imai, M. Tokumitsu, and A. Minakawa, “Design and performance
of low-current GaAs MMICs for L-band front-end applications,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. , vol. 39, pp. 209–215, Feb. 1991.
[15] C.E.Biber,M.L.Schmatz,T.Morf,U.Lott,E.Morifuji,andW.Bäch-
told, “Technology independent degradation of minimum noise figureduetopadparasitics,”in Proc.IEEEMTT-SInt.MicrowaveSymp.Dig. ,
Baltimore, MD, June 1998, pp. 145–148.
[16] R. P. Jindal, “Noise associated with distributed resistance of MOSFET
gatestructuresinintegratedcircuits,” IEEETrans.ElectronDevices ,vol.
31, pp. 1505–1509, Oct. 1984.
[17] M.delMarHershenson,S.S.Mohan,S.P.Boyd,andT.H.Lee,“Opti-
mizationofinductorcircuitsviageometricprogramming,”in Proc.36th
Design Automation Conf. , New Orleans,LA, June 1999,pp.994–998.
[18] C. P. Yue and S. S. Wong, “On-chip spiral inductors with patterned
ground shields for Si-based RF ICs,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits , vol.
33, pp. 743–752, May 1998.
Jung-Suk Goo (S’97–M’02) was born in Seoul,
Korea, in 1966. He received the B.S. degree inelectricalengineeringfromYonseiUniversity,Seoul,
in 1988 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineeringfromStanfordUniversity,Stanford,CA,
in 1997 and 2001, respectively.
From 1988 to 1989, he was with GoldStar
Semiconductor Company, Korea, involved in
EPROM and 4M DRAM projects. Subsequently,
he was with LG Semiconductor Company, Korea,
until 1995. During this period, he was engaged in
next-generation DRAM development such as 64M and 256M and also was
involved in a Flash memory project. His primary research areas were DRAM
processdevelopment, deviceevaluation,and reliability modeling,inparticular,
the hot-carrier effects. In 2001, he was briefly with the Strategic Technology
Group of Advanced Micro Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, working on nanoscale
MOSFET technology development, and with Atheros Communications, Inc.,
Sunnyvale,engagedinIEEE802.11aWLANchipsetdevelopment.In2002,he
rejoined the Strategic Technology Group of Advanced Micro Devices, where
he is currently a Member of Technical Staff. He has authored and coauthoredmore than 24 journal and conference papers and holds six U.S. patents. His
current research interests are the design and modeling of CMOS RF circuits
and nanoscale MOSFET physics.1002 IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 37, NO. 8, AUGUST 2002
Hee-TaeAhn (S’98–M’02)receivedtheB.S.degree
in1987fromHankukAviationUniversity,Korea.He
received the M.S. and Ph.D degrees in electrical en-
gineering from Arizona State University, Tempe, in
1995 and 2000, respectively.
From 1987 to 1993, he was with the Research
and Development Center of LG Semiconductor
Company,Korea,wherehedesignedseveralmemory
ICs.In1995,hejoinedAT&TBellLaboratories,Al-
lentown, PA,where he was involved in mixed-signal
integrated-circuit design, and from 1996 to 1998,
he was with SUN Microsystems, Palo Alto, CA, where he designed CMOS
phase-locked-loopintegratedcircuits.From2000to2001,hewaswithNational
Semiconductor, Santa Clara, CA, where he was working on analog IC design
including frequency synthesizers and voltage-controlled oscillators. Since2001,hehasbeenwithQualcommInc,SanDiego,CA.Heiscurrentlyworking
on a transceiver chipset design for CDMA technology. His current research
interests are high-frequency analog IC design for wireless communication
applications.
Donald J. Ladwig was born in Okinawa, Japan, on November 11, 1961. He
graduated from the DeVry Institute of Technology, Irving, TX, in 1986, as an
Electronic Technician.
HejoinedTexasInstrumentsIncorporated,Dallas,TX,in1986,andhasbeen
workinginthemodelingfieldsince1988.Hespecializesinon-wafercharacter-
ization of
/83-parameters, high-frequency and low-frequency noise, and dc and
capacitance for semiconductor components. He is currently involved in model
parameter extraction.
Zhiping Yu (SM’90) received the B.S. degree from
TsinghuaUniversity,Beijing,China,in1967andthe
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, in 1980 and 1985, respectively.
He is currently a Senior Research Scientist with
the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford
University, and also holds a full professorship at
Tsinghua University. His research interests focus
on IC process, device and circuit simulation, and in
particular, the numerical techniques and modeling
of RF and heterostructure devices. He has been
involved in efforts to develop a simulation package for optoelectronic devices
and three-dimensional solid modeling for ICs. He is also a Consultant toHewlett-Packard Computer Systems and Technology Lab, Palo Alto, CA,
developing advanced transport models for subquarter-micrometer CMOS
technology, including quantum mechanical effects.
Dr. Yu currently serves as an Associate Editor of the IEEE T
RANSACTIONS
ONCOMPUTER -AIDEDDESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS.
Thomas H. Lee (M’87) received the S.B., S.M.,
and Sc.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
in 1983, 1985, and 1990, respectively.
He joined Analog Devices, Norwood, MA,
in 1990, where he was primarily engaged in thedesign of high-speed clock recovery devices. In
1992, he joined Rambus Inc., Mountain View, CA,
where he developed high-speed analog circuitry
for 500-Mbyte/s CMOS DRAMs. He has also con-
tributed to the development of phase-locked loops
in the StrongARM, Alpha, and K6/K7 microprocessors. Since 1994, he has
been an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering at Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, where his research focus has been on gigahertz-speed wireline
and wireless integrated circuits built in conventional silicon technologies,particularly CMOS. He holds 12 U.S. patents. He is the author of The Design
of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
Univ. Press, 1998) and is a coauthor of two additional books on RF circuit
design.He is also a cofounder of Matrix Semiconductor, Santa Clara, CA.
Dr. Lee has twice received the Best Paper Award at the IEEE International
Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC). He was a coauthor of a Best Student
Paper at ISSCC, and recently won a Packard Foundation Fellowship. He is aDistinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society, and was re-
cently named a Distinguished Microwave Lecturer.
Robert W. Dutton (S’67–M’70–SM’80–F’84)
received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from the
University of California, Berkeley, in 1966, 1967,
and 1970, respectively.
He is Professor of Electrical Engineering at Stan-
ford University, Stanford, CA, and Director of Re-
search in the Center for Integrated Systems. He heldsummer staff positions at Fairchild, Bell Telephone
Laboratories, Hewlett-Packard, IBM Research, and
Matsushitain 1967, 1973,1975, 1977, and 1988, re-
spectively. He has published more than 200 journal
articles and graduated more than 48 doctorate students. His research interests
focusonICprocess,device,andcircuittechnologies,especiallytheuseofcom-
puter-aided design (CAD) and parallel computational methods.
Dr. Dutton was Editor of the IEEE T
RANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER -AIDED
DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMSfrom 1984 to 1986. He was
the winner of the 1987 IEEE J. J. Ebers Award, the 1988 Guggenheim Fellow-
shiptostudyinJapan,andtheJackA.MortonAwardfor1996.Hewaselected
to the National Academy of Engineering in 1991.