Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 157:{, 2021 ACML 2021
Expressive Neural Voice Cloning
Paarth Neekhara* pneekhar@eng.ucsd.edu
Shehzeen Hussain* ssh028@eng.ucsd.edu
Shlomo Dubnov sdubnov@ucsd.edu
Farinaz Koushanfar fkoushanfar@eng.ucsd.edu
Julian McAuley jmcauley@eng.ucsd.edu
University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr, La Jolla, CA 92093
* Denotes Equal Contribution
Editors: Vineeth N Balasubramanian and Ivor Tsang
Abstract
Voice cloning is the task of learning to synthesize the voice of an unseen speaker from a few
samples. While current voice cloning methods achieve promising results in Text-to-Speech
(TTS) synthesis for a new voice, these approaches lack the ability to control the expressive-
ness of synthesized audio. In this work, we propose a controllable voice cloning method that
allows ne-grained control over various style aspects of the synthesized speech for an unseen
speaker. We achieve this by explicitly conditioning the speech synthesis model on a speaker
encoding, pitch contour and latent style tokens during training. Through both quantitative
and qualitative evaluations, we show that our framework can be used for various expres-
sive voice cloning tasks using only a few transcribed or untranscribed speech samples for
a new speaker. These cloning tasks include style transfer from a reference speech, synthe-
sizing speech directly from text, and ne-grained style control by manipulating the style
conditioning variables during inference.1
Keywords: TTS, Voice Cloning, Expressive TTS, Deep Learning
1. Introduction
Recent research eorts in voice cloning have focused on synthesizing a person's voice from
only a few reference audio samples. While such a system can generate speech from text for
a new speaker, it leaves out control over various style aspects of speech. Explicit control
over the style aspects of cloned speech is desirable for several applications, such as: voice-
overs in animated lms, synthesizing realistic and expressive speech for DeepFake videos,
translating speech from one language to another while preserving speaking style and speaker
identity, advertisement campaigns with expressive speech in multiple voices and languages
(etc.). Expressive voice cloning systems can also help create personalized speech interfaces
with voice assistants in smartphones, cars, and home assistants. Since speech serves as a
primary communication interface between machine learning agents and humans, the ability
to speak expressively is a very desirable quality for voice cloning systems. Furthermore,
such systems can potentially empower individuals who have lost their ability to speak.
1. Audio examples: https://expressivecloning.github.io/
Interactive Demo: https://expressivecloning.github.io/app.html
©2021 P. Neekhara*, S. Hussain*, S. Dubnov, F. Koushanfar & J. McAuley.Neekhara* Hussain* Dubnov Koushanfar McAuley
The goal of voice cloning is commonly formulated as learning to synthesize the voice of
an unseen speaker using only a few seconds of transcribed or untranscribed speech. This
is typically done by embedding speaker-dependent information from the available speech
samples of the new speaker, and conditioning a trained multi-speaker Text-to-Speech (TTS)
model on the derived speaker embedding Arik et al. (2018); Jia et al. (2018). While such
a system can achieve promising results in closely retaining speaker-specic characteristics
in the cloned speech, it does not oer control over other aspects of speech that are not
contained in the text or the speaker-specic embedding. These aspects include variation in
tone, speaking rate, emphasis and emotions.
Several past works have focused on the problem of expressive TTS synthesis by learning
latent variables for controlling the style aspects of speech synthesized for a given text Wang
et al. (2018); Skerry-Ryan et al. (2018). Such models are usually trained on a single-speaker
expressive speech dataset to learn meaningful latent codes for various style aspects of the
speech. Recent works Stanton et al. (2018); Valle et al. (2020), have extended the idea of
learning style representations to a multi-speaker setting by conditioning the TTS synthesis
model on both speaker identity and style encodings. Such techniques show promise in
disentangling style and speaker specic information, and generate dierent style variants of
synthesized speech for the same text and speaker. However, these methods are limited by
the speakers used in the training set and cannot be directly used for synthesizing voices of
speakers not seen during training.
Adapting multi-speaker TTS models for voice cloning requires scaling up model training
to a large multi-speaker TTS dataset, containing several minutes of transcribed speech from
thousands of speakers. High speaker diversity in the training data is important to achieve
generalization on unseen speakers Arik et al. (2018); Jia et al. (2018). The goal of our
work is to perform TTS synthesis for an unseen speaker with control over the style aspects
of generated speech . As a rst step in this direction, we train a TTS model conditioned
on speaker encodings and latent style tokens Wang et al. (2018) on a large multi-speaker
dataset. While this model is able to generate voices for unseen speakers, we nd that the
results fall short in terms of speech naturalness and style control during synthesis. Our
results suggest that learning meaningful latent style aspects is dicult when training on a
large multi-speaker dataset containing speech with mostly neutral style and expressions.
To address problem of disentangling style and speaker characteristics on a large multi-
speaker dataset containing mostly style-neutral speech, we propose a voice cloning model
that is conditioned on both latent and heuristically derived style information. Specically,
we condition our TTS synthesis model on (i) text, (ii) speaker encoding (iii) pitch contour of
the target speech and (iv) latent style tokens Wang et al. (2018). By conditioning synthesis
on various style aspects and speaker embeddings derived from the target speech, we are
able to train a model that oers ne-grained style control for synthesized speech. To adapt
inference for an unseen speaker, we can either perform zero-shot inference or ne-tune the
synthesis model on the limited text and speech pairs for the new speaker. Through both
quantitative and qualitative evaluations, we demonstrate that our proposed model can make
a new voice express, emote, sing or copy the style of a given reference speech.
The main contributions of this study are as follows:
•We introduce the problem of expressive voice cloning | Synthesizing a person's voice
from a few audio samples and allowing control over the style aspects of the synthesizedExpressive Neural Voice Cloning
speech. While past works have studied the problem of expressive TTS, they have not
investigated the problem of cloning a new speaker's voice in an expressive manner.
•We propose an expressive voice cloning framework by training a controllable TTS
model on a large multi-speaker dataset with mostly style-neutral speech. By allowing
explicit control over the speaker encoding, pitch and rhythm of the synthesized speech,
we are able to generate expressive speech for a new speaker that generalizes beyond
the distribution of the training data.
•We develop three benchmark tasks and dene metrics to evaluate expressive voice
cloning systems in terms of speaker similarity, style similarity and naturalness of
synthesized speech. We demonstrate that our proposed framework signicantly out-
performs baseline models that do not use explicit pitch contours for training.
2. Background and Related Work
Neural TTS: State-of-the-art neural approaches for natural TTS synthesis Ping et al.
(2018a); Shen et al. (2018) typically decompose the waveform synthesis pipeline into two
steps: (1) Synthesizing perceptually informed mel-spectrograms from language using an
attention based sequence-to-sequence model like Tacotron Wang et al. (2017) or Tacotron
2 Shen et al. (2018). (2) Vocoding the synthesized spectrograms to audible waveforms using
a neural vocoder van den Oord et al. (2016); Prenger et al. (2018); Neekhara et al. (2019) or
heuristic methods like the Grin-Lim Grin et al. (1984) algorithm. Multi-speaker TTS
models Gibiansky et al. (2017); Ping et al. (2018b) extend this line of work by additionally
conditioning the spectrogram synthesis model on speaker embeddings, which are trained
end-to-end using the speaker labels in the TTS dataset. While these approaches achieve
promising results in synthesizing speech for multiple speakers for a given text, they cannot
be directly used to synthesize voices of speakers not seen during training.
Voice Cloning: Voice cloning focuses on generative modeling of speech conditioned on
a speaker encoding derived from a few reference speaker audio samples. While speech
synthesis models exist van den Oord et al. (2016); Wang et al. (2017), it has been a challenge
to adapt these voice models to new speakers with limited data. Recent eorts have been
made in designing systems that can learn to synthesize a person's voice from only a few
audio samples Arik et al. (2018); Chen et al. (2019); Cooper et al. (2020); Huang et al.
(2020); Jia et al. (2018). They train a separate speaker encoding network to condition a
multi-speaker TTS model on speaker dependent information. Since the speaker encoding
network operates on waveforms, it can be used for zero-shot voice cloning from untranscribed
utterances of a target speaker. Additionally, the authors of Arik et al. (2018) demonstrate
that the synthesis model can be ne-tuned on limited text and audio pairs of a new speaker
to improve the speaker similarity of the cloned speech.
Expressive Speech Synthesis: Prior works Wang et al. (2018); Stanton et al. (2018);
Skerry-Ryan et al. (2018) on expressive speech synthesis focus on models that can be con-
ditioned on text and a latent embedding for style or prosody. During training, the style
embeddings are derived using a learnable module called Global Style Tokens (GST) , that
operates on the target speech for a given phrase and derives a style embedding through
attention over a dictionary of learnable vectors. During inference, the synthesizer can beNeekhara* Hussain* Dubnov Koushanfar McAuley
conditioned on dierent reference audios to produce style variants of speech for the same
text. Manipulating these latent style variables during inference oers some coarse control
over the style of the synthesized speech. Recently proposed Mellotron model Valle et al.
(2020) uses a combination of explicit and latent style variables to oer more ne-grained
control over the expressive characteristics of synthesized speech. Specically, Mellotron
conditions the spectrogram synthesis network on pitch contour, GSTs Wang et al. (2018)
and speaker ID during training. During inference, the synthesizer can be conditioned on
the melodic information|pitch and rhythm of a reference speech and synthesize speech
in the voice of a given speaker in the training set. The authors demonstrate that explicit
conditioning on pitch contour during training phase, makes it possible to generalize the
inference on various melodic pitch contours. While Mellotron allows expressive TTS for
speakers in the training dataset, since it uses a xed size speaker embedding matrix for
speaker conditioning, it cannot be used to generate speech for new speakers.
3. Methodology
Our expressive voice cloning framework is a multi-speaker TTS model that is conditioned on
speaker encodings and style aspects of speech. Style conditioning in expressive TTS models
is popularly done by learning a dictionary of latent style vectors called Global Style Tokens
(GST) Wang et al. (2018). While GSTs can learn meaningful latent codes when trained on
a dataset with high variation in expressions, we empirically nd that it oers limited style
control when trained on a large multi-speaker dataset with mostly neutral prosody.
Signal processing heuristics like the Yin algorithm De Cheveign e and Kawahara (2002)
can derive the fundamental frequency contour (pitch contour) and voicing decisions from
speech, which can be useful for expressive speech synthesis. We nd that using a combina-
tion of latent and heuristically derived style information in the TTS model not only provides
ne-grained control over the style aspects of synthesized speech, but also scales up to a large
multi-speaker dataset to produce more natural sounding audio for an unseen speaker. A
high level overview of our expressive voice cloning framework is shown in Figure 1. Similar
to past works on voice cloning Arik et al. (2018); Jia et al. (2018), the three main compo-
nents Speaker Encoder ,Mel Spectrogram Synthesizer andVocoder are all trained separately.
We describe the individual components of our framework and their training objectives in
the following sections.
3.1. Speaker Encoder
Speaker conditioning in multi-speaker TTS models is usually done using a lookup in the
speaker embedding matrix which is randomly initialized and trained end-to-end with the
synthesizer. While such a framework learns speaker-specic information via the embedding
vectors, synthesis cannot be generalized to unseen speakers. To adapt the multi-speaker
TTS model for the goal of voice cloning, the speaker embedding layer can be replaced with
a speaker encoder that derives speaker specic information from the target waveform. In
this setting, the speaker encoder can obtain embeddings for speakers not seen during train-
ing using a few reference speech samples. To obtain meaningful embeddings, the speaker
encoder should be trained to discriminate between dierent speakers for the task of speaker
verication Wan et al. (2017).Expressive Neural Voice Cloning
Concat Text
GST
Pitch Contour Target Waveform 
Encoder Attention Decoder Speaker 
Encoder 
Vocoder 
Synthesized 
Waveform Log-mel 
spectrogram 
Synthesizer 
Figure 1: Expressive Voice Cloning Model: Tacotron-2 TTS model conditioned on speaker
and style characteristics derived from the target audio of a given text. At inference
time, the model can be provided independent references for style and speaker
encodings to achieve expressive voice cloning.
We follow the speaker encoder architecture described in Wan et al. (2017); Louppe
(2019b). The network is a stack of 3 LSTM layers with 256 cells in each layer that operate on
mel-spectrograms with 40 channels. The nal speaker embedding is obtained by projecting
the LSTM output at the last layer to 256 dimensions followed by L2normalization. Note
that ours is a smaller model than that used in Jia et al. (2018) which had 768 cells in
each LSTM layer. The speaker encoder is trained to optimize a generalized end-to-end
speaker verication loss Wan et al. (2017), that encourages high cosine similarity between
embeddings from same speaker and low similarity between dierent speaker embeddings.
During inference, each utterance is broken into smaller segments of 1,600 ms with 1,000 ms
overlap between consecutive segments. The nal embedding is estimated by averaging the
embedding of each individual segment.
3.2. Mel-Spectrogram Synthesizer
The goal of our synthesis model is to disentangle the style and speaker-specic information
in speech by conditioning our TTS synthesis model on the speaker encoding and various
style aspects. To this end, we adapt the synthesis model used in Mellotron Valle et al.
(2020) for the task of voice cloning. Mellotron is a multi-speaker TTS model that extends
Tacotron 2 GST Wang et al. (2018) by additional conditioning on pitch contours and speaker
embeddings. To adapt Mellotron for voice cloning, we remove the speaker embedding layer
and replace it with the speaker encoder network described in Section 3.1.
At its core, our synthesis model based on Tacotron 2 Shen et al. (2018), is an LSTM
based sequence-to-sequence model composed of an encoder that operates on a sequence
of characters and a decoder that generates the individual frames of the mel spectrogram
while attending over the encoded representations. Along with the encoded representation
for text, we concatenate the speaker encoding (obtained from the speaker encoder) and the
GST embedding at each time-step. The GST embedding is obtained by querying a dictio-
nary of latent style vectors with the target mel-spectrogram using a multi-headed attention
mechanism described in Wang et al. (2018). Decoding occurs in an autoregressive manner
where we synthesize one mel spectrogram frame at a time by providing the fundamental
frequency (from the pitch contour) and the mel spectrogram of the previous frame as theNeekhara* Hussain* Dubnov Koushanfar McAuley
input to the decoder. The pitch contours are derived from the target speech using the Yin
algorithm with harmonicity thresholds between 0.1 and 0.25.
In this way, we can factor mel-spectrogram synthesis into the following variables: text
(t),speaker encoding ( s),pitch contour ( f0)and latent style embedding obtained from GST
(z). Formally, our synthesizer is a generative model g(t;s;f 0;z;W) that is parameterized
by trainable weights W, trained to optimize a loss function Lthat penalizes the dierences
between the generated and ground truth mel spectrogram. That is,
min
WE(ti;ai)DfL(g(ti;si;f0i;zi;W);meli)g (1)
whereDis the dataset containing text and audio pairs ( ti;ai). The variables ( si;f0i;zi;meli)
are all derived from the target waveform ai. For the loss function L, we use the L2 loss
between the generated and ground truth mel spectrograms.
During training, the synthesizer learns another latent variable: the attention map be-
tween the encoder and decoder states which captures the alignment between text and audio.
Following the notation used in Valle et al. (2020), we call this latent variable rhythm , since it
controls the timing aspects of synthesized speech. Note that unlike other style aspects which
can be obtained directly from ai, deriving rhythm requires both text and audio ( ti;ai). In
our experiments, we obtain the rhythm by using our synthesizer as a forced-aligner. That
is, for a given text and audio pair, we derive the attention map between the encoder and
decoder states by doing a forward pass through our model using teacher forcing. Therefore,
during inference, our synthesizer gcan be explicitly conditioned on rhythm rderived from
some text and audio pair: g(t;s;f 0;z;r;W).
While the style aspects are obtained from the target waveform of the same speaker
during training, we can use a dierent reference audio and text pair during inference. For
example, we can transfer the pitch contour and rhythm of a style reference audio Sfrom a
dierent speaker to the voice of a given target speaker Tas follows:
mel=g(tS;sT;f0S;zT;rS;W) (2)
The output melshould have the same pitch and rhythm as the style reference Sand should
retain the latent style aspects and voice of the target speaker T. In our work we focus on
three dierent cloning tasks with dierent sources of style conditioning information which
we discuss in Section 4.3.
Additionally, to assess the importance of pitch contours during training, we train another
TTS model that is conditioned only on the latent style aspects obtained using GST. We use
the same Tacotron2 architecture and GST module as our proposed model. Formally, this
alternative synthesizer g(t;s;z ;W) is trained to optimize the same objective as Equation 1:
min
WE(ti;ai)DfL(g(ti;si;zi;W);meli)g (3)
We refer to this alternative model as Tacotron2 + GST in our experiments. Similar to our
proposed system, this model can also be additionally conditioned on rhythm. Since we are
not explicitly conditioning the model on pitch contours, we expect the pitch variation in
speech to be captured as part of the latent style tokens. We empirically demonstrate that
using only latent style representation on a large multi-speaker dataset with neutral prosody
oers limited style control and audio naturalness.Expressive Neural Voice Cloning
Vocoder: For decoding the synthesized mel-spectrograms into listenable waveforms,
we use the WaveGlow Prenger et al. (2018) model trained on the single speaker Sally
dataset Valle et al. (2020). An advantage of WaveGlow over WaveNet van den Oord et al.
(2016) is that it allows real-time inference, while being competitive in terms of audio nat-
uralness. The same vocoder model is used across all experiments and datasets. We nd
that the vocoder model trained on a single speaker generalizes well across all speakers in
our datasets.
3.3. Cloning Techniques: Zero-Shot and Model Adaptation
We adopt the following two approaches for cloning the voice of a new speaker from a few
transcribed or untranscribed speech samples:
Zero-Shot: For zero-shot voice cloning, we derive the speaker embedding by taking the
mean followed by L-2 normalization of the speaker encodings of the individual samples of
the target speaker. Since speaker encodings are obtained directly from the waveforms, we
do not require audio transcriptions of the new speaker for zero-shot voice cloning.
Model Adaptation: When transcribed samples of a new speaker are available, we
can ne-tune our synthesis model using the text and audio pairs. As shown in Neural
Voice Cloning Arik et al. (2018), ne-tuning can signicantly improve the speaker similarity
metrics of the cloned speech. Also, the authors of Arik et al. (2018) observe that ne-tuning
the whole synthesis model is faster and more eective than ne-tuning only the speaker
embedding layer since more degrees of freedom are allowed in the whole model adaptation.
Our preliminary experiments on model adaptation suggested the same. We hypothesize the
reason for this is that ne-tuning the last-few layers of the synthesis model is essential, if not
sucient, to adapt the synthesizer to the speaker-specic speech characteristics. Therefore,
we study the following two model adaptation techniques: Adaptation whole - Fine-tune
all the parameters of the synthesis model on the text and audio pairs of the new speaker.
Adaptation decoder - Fine-tune only the decoder parameters of the synthesis model. The
advantage of only adapting the decoder parameters is that it requires fewer speaker-specic
model parameters and a shared encoder can be used across all speakers in a real-world
deployment setting. In both of the above adaptation settings, we ne-tune our model for
100 to 200 iterations using Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-4. Model adaptation
takes up to 6 minutes for ne-tuning on 1 to 20 samples of the target speaker on a single
Nvidia Titan 1080 GPU.
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets and Training
We train our mel-spectrogram synthesis model on the clean subset of the publicly available
Libri-TTS Zen et al. (2019) dataset| train-clean-100 andtrain-clean-360 . This clean subset
contains around 245 hours of speech across 1151 speakers sampled at 24 kHz. Past works
on voice cloning Wan et al. (2017); Arik et al. (2018) trained their synthesis models on the
LibriSpeech dataset Panayotov et al. (2015) and empirically demonstrated the importance
of a speaker-diverse training dataset for the task of voice cloning. We lter out utterances
longer than 10 seconds and resample waveforms to 22050 Hz.Neekhara* Hussain* Dubnov Koushanfar McAuley
For training the synthesizer, we warm start our model using the pre-trained Mellotron
checkpoint which is trained on a subset of LibriTTS containing 123 speakers. The speaker
embedding layer is replaced with our speaker encoding network which is kept frozen during
training. We use a validation set with 250 examples and train the model using a batch
size of 32 and an initial learning rate of 5e-4. We use an Adam optimizer Kingma and
Ba (2015) to update the weights and anneal the learning rate to half its value every 50k
mini-batch iterations. We include details of our model architecture and hyper-parameters
in Section 4.2 and point to our codebase2for precise model implementation.
For the Tacotron 2 + GST model, we use the same Tacotron 2 architecture and GST
hyper-parameters as our proposed model. Training for the proposed model and the Tacotron
2 + GST model converged in 210,000 and 185,000 mini-batch iterations respectively and
took around 4 seconds per iteration on a single Nvidia Titan 1080 GPU. The Resemblyzer
speaker encoder Louppe (2019b,a) used in our experiments is trained on the VoxCeleb Na-
grani et al. (2019), VoxCeleb2 Chung et al. (2018) and LibriSpeech-other Panayotov et al.
(2015) datasets containing a total of 8.4k speakers. The authors of Louppe (2019a) report a
4.5% Equal Error Rate (EER) for the task of speaker verication using this speaker encoder
on their internal test set.
4.2. Model architecture and hyper-parameter details
Our spectrogram synthesizer is closely follows the Tacotron-2 architecture Shen et al. (2018).
The model is composed of an encoder and decoder with attention. The encoder processes
the input sequence using a stack of 3 1-d convolution layers followed by a bi-directional
LSTM. The input tokens are embedded using a 512 dimensional embedding layer. Each
convolutional layer has 512 lters with a kernel size of 5 followed by batch normalization and
ReLU activation functions. The single bidirectional LSTM consists of 256 hidden units in
each direction leading to a 512 dimensional embedding at each time-step. At each time-step
of the encoder output, we concatenate the speaker encoding and the GST embedding. The
GST module we use follows the same architecture as that proposed in Wang et al. (2018)
except that we use 8 attention heads instead of 4.
The attention module follows the location sensitive attention procedure and hyper-
parameters described in Shen et al. (2018). The decoder network is an autoregressive
network that takes in as input the spectrogam frame and fundamental frequency of the
previous time-step. The spectrogram frame goes through a pre-net module which consists
of 2 fully connected layers with 256 hidden units and ReLU activation. The pre-net module
acts as an information bottleneck which is essential for learning attention Shen et al. (2018).
The decoder is a stack of 2 convolutional layers with 1024 units in each layer. The nal
predicted mel-spectrogram is passed through a 5 layer convolutional post-net which predicts
a residual that can be added to improve overall reconstruction error. Each post-net layer
uses 512 lters with kernel width of 5 followed by batch normalization and tanh activation
function.
We use Adam Kingma and Ba (2015) optimizer with hyper-parameters with an initial
learning rate 1e-4 and 1= 0:9;2= 0:999. During training, we use a mini-batch size of 32
and anneal learning rate to half its value every 50k mini-batch iterations.
2. https://expressivecloning.github.io/Expressive Neural Voice Cloning
Character 
Embedding 3 Conv Layers Bidirectional 
LSTM Attention 
Layer Concat Speaker Encoding 
GST embedding 
2 - LSTM layers 
Decoder Previous mel-spectrogram frame 
Previous F0Linear Projection 5 Conv layer 
Post-net +Output mel-spectrogram 
2-layer 
Pre-net 
Figure 2: Mel-spectrogram synthesizer model architecture
4.3. Cloning Tasks
In this section, we discuss the three main tasks for which we evaluate our voice cloning
methods. When cloning the voice of a new speaker, we require a few audio samples of the
speaker to obtain the speaker encoding. We refer to these samples as target speaker samples .
We perform voice cloning for the speakers in the VCTK dataset Veaux et al. (2017). The
VCTK dataset contains speech sampled at 48 KHz from 108 native English speakers, the
majority of which have British accents. We down-sampled the audio to 22,050 KHz to
make it consistent with our training data. To synthesize the speech for a given speaker
encoding and text, our synthesis model additionally requires various style conditioning
variables described in Section 3.2. While the latent GST embedding can be obtained from
thetarget speaker samples , pitch contour and rhythm information needs to be derived from
astyle reference audio that corresponds to the given text. In case we do not have a style
reference audio available, we can synthesize one using a single speaker TTS system. To
evaluate our cloning techniques objectively in terms of style and speaker disentanglement,
and also assess their usefulness in real world settings, we perform the following cloning
tasks:
1. Text Cloning speech directly from text: For cloning speech directly from text, we
rst synthesize speech for the given text using a single speaker TTS model: Tacotron 2 +
WaveGlow trained on the LJ Speech Ito (2017) dataset. We then derive the pitch contour
of the synthetic speech using the Yin algorithm De Cheveign e and Kawahara (2002) and
scale the pitch contour linearly to have the same mean pitch as that of the target speaker
samples . For deriving rhythm, we use our proposed synthesis model as a forced aligner
between the text and Tacotron2-synthesized speech. We use the target speaker samples for
obtaining the GST embedding for both our proposed model and the baseline Tacotron2 +
GST model.
2. Imitation - Reconstruct a sample from the target speaker: In this setup, we use a text
and audio pair of the target speaker (not contained in the target speaker samples ), and try
to reconstruct the audio from its factorized representation using our synthesis model. All of
the style conditioning variables - pitch, rhythm and GST embedding are derived from theNeekhara* Hussain* Dubnov Koushanfar McAuley
speech sample we are trying to imitate. The imitation task is a toy experiment that allows
quantitative evaluation of style similarity metrics between the synthesized speech and style
reference.
3. Style Transfer - Transfer the pitch and rhythm of speech from a dierent expressive
speaker: The goal of this task is to transfer the pitch and rhythm from some expressive
speech to the cloned speech for the target speaker. For this task, we use examples from the
single speaker Blizzard 2013 dataset King and Karaiskos (2013) as style references. This
dataset contains expressive audio book readings from a single speaker with high variation
in emotion and pitch. For our proposed model, we use this style reference audio to extract
the pitch and rhythm. Similar to the Text task, we scale the pitch contour to have the same
mean as that of the target speaker samples . In-order to retain speaker-specic latent style
aspects, we use target speaker samples to extract the GST embedding. For the Tacotron2
+ GST model, which does not have explicit pitch conditioning, we use the style reference
audio for obtaining the GST embedding and the rhythm.
4.4. Results
For the above described cloning tasks, we evaluate three aspects of the cloned speech: i)
speaker similarity to the target speaker, ii) style similarity to the reference style and iii)
speech naturalness. We encourage the readers to listen to our audio examples referenced in
the footnote of the rst page to contextualize the following results.
Speaker Classication Accuracy: We train a speaker classier on the VCTK dataset
to classify a given utterance as one of the 108 speakers. The speaker classier is a two layer
neural network with 256 hidden units that takes as input the speaker encoding obtained
through our pre-trained speaker encoder network. Similar to Arik et al. (2018), our speaker
classier achieves 100% accuracy on a hold out set containing 200 examples from the VCTK
dataset. However, since our classication model and training dataset for the synthesizer
are not the same as Arik et al. (2018) (1,151 speakers in ours vs. 2,481 speakers in Arik
et al. (2018)), we do not make direct comparisons with their work. We conduct our speaker
classication evaluations on all 108 speakers of the VCTK dataset. We clone 25 speech
samples per speaker for each task described in Section 4.3. Figure 3 (left) shows the speaker
classication accuracy curves for all cloning tasks and techniques with respect to the number
of target speaker samples. Our results are consistent with the following ndings of Arik et al.
(2018)|Model adaptation signicantly outperforms the zero-shot voice cloning technique
since it allows the model to adjust to the speaker characteristics of the new speaker. More
target speaker samples helps improve speaker classication accuracy, although in the zero-
shot scenario we do not observe much improvement after 10 target speaker samples.
For zero-shot voice cloning, both Tacotron2-GST and our proposed model achieve similar
speaker classication accuracy for Text and Style Transfer cloning tasks. The accuracy of
our proposed model is slightly higher for the imitation task as compared to other tasks
for both model adaptation and zero-shot voice cloning. This implies that conditioning on
the actual pitch contour of the target speaker improves speaker specic characteristics of
the cloned speech. While linear scaling of a reference style pitch contour works well, our
ndings motivate future research on predicting speaker-specic pitch contours from text
and speaker encodings.Expressive Neural Voice Cloning
1510200102030405060708090Speaker Classification Accuracy ( %)Number of Target Speaker Samples  Tacotron2 + GST Zeroshot - Text Tacotron2 + GST Zeroshot - Imitation Tacotron2 + GST Zeroshot - Style Transfer Zero-shot - Text Zero-shot - Imitation Zero-shot - Style Transfer Adaption Decoder - Text Adaption Decoder - Imitation Adaption Decoder - Style Transfer Adaption Whole - Text Adaption Whole - Imitation Adaption Whole - Style Transfer
15102002468101214161820SV -Equal Error Rate (%)Number of Target Speaker SamplesVCTK Real
Figure 3: Speaker similarity evaluation of each cloning technique for dierent voice cloning
tasks in terms of Speaker Classication Accuracy and Speaker Verication Equal
Error Rate (SV-EER).
Speaker verication Equal Error Rate (SV-EER): SV-EER is another objective
metric used to evaluate speaker similarity between the cloned audio and the ground-truth
reference audio. We use a speaker verication system that scores the speaker similarity
between two utterances based on the cosine similarity of the encodings obtained using the
speaker encoder described in Section 3.1. Equal Error Rate (EER) is the point when the
false acceptance rate and false rejection rate of the speaker verication system are equal.
We perform speaker verication evaluations on randomly selected 20 speakers in the
VCTK dataset. We enroll 5 speech samples per speaker in the speaker verication system
and synthesize 50 speech samples per speaker for each cloning task. EERs are estimated
by pairing each sample of the same speaker with another sample from a dierent speaker.
Figure 3 shows the plots of SV-EER for dierent cloning techniques and tasks using our
proposed model and also the those estimated using real data. Our observations on the
SV-EER metric are similar to those on the accuracy metric. Model adaptation outperforms
zero-shot cloning techniques and with more than 10 cloning samples achieves similar EER
as the real data. Additionally, we include human evaluation scores on speaker similarity in
our supplementary material.
Style Similarity: In order to evaluate the similarity between the style of synthesized
and reference audio, we perform quantitative evaluation on the Imitation task described
in Section 4.3. We use the following error metrics: Gross Pitch Error (GPE) Nakatani
et al. (2008), Voicing Decision Error (VDE) Nakatani et al. (2008) and F0 Frame Error
(FFE) Chu and Alwan (2009). Results are presented in Table 1 in which we compare the
error values for dierent approaches when using 10 target speaker samples for cloning. We
synthesize 25 speech samples per speaker for all speakers in the VCTK dataset to estimate
the reported error values. Our proposed models signicantly outperform the Tacotron 2 +
GST baseline, clearly indicating the importance of pitch contour conditioning for accurate
style transfer.Neekhara* Hussain* Dubnov Koushanfar McAuley
Imitation Style Transfer
Approach GPE VDE FFE Style-MOS
Tacotron2 + GST - Zero-shot 20.37% 26.39% 29.47% 2:690:11
Proposed Model - Zero-shot 3.72% 10.65% 11.74% 3:150:11
Proposed Model - Adaptation Whole 2.97% 12.58% 13.60% 3:400:10
Proposed Model - Adaptation Decoder 2.39% 11.60% 12.51% 3:290:10
Table 1: Style similarity evaluations for the imitation and style transfer tasks. We use
three objective error metrics (lower values are better). For the style transfer task
we present the mean opinion scores on style similarity (Style-MOS) with 95%
condence interval.
We also conduct a crowd-sourced listening test on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)
for the style transfer task in which we ask the listeners to rate the style similarity between
the ground truth style reference and synthesized audio on a 5 point scale (interface for
this study is included in the supplementary material). For each cloning technique (using
10 target speaker samples), we synthesize 25 audio samples per speaker for 20 speakers
in the VCTK dataset leading to 500 evaluations of each technique. We present the style
similarity Mean Opinion Scores (Style-MOS) in Table 1. It can be seen that our proposed
models signicantly outperform the Tacotron 2 + GST model. Model adaptation techniques
perform slightly better than zero-shot method suggesting that ne-tuning improves the
model predictions for an unseen speaker encoding.
Naturalness: To assess speech naturalness, we conducted a crowd-sourced listening
test on AMT and asked listeners to rate each audio utterance on a 5-point naturalness
scale to collect Mean Opinion Scores (MOS). Similar to the above mentioned user study,
we use 10 target speaker samples for each cloning technique. All evaluations are conducted
on randomly selected 20 VCTK speakers with 25 audio samples synthesized per speaker.
Each sample is rated independently by a single listener leading to 500 evaluations for each
technique per cloning task. We report the MOS of Real data and audio synthesized using
dierent cloning techniques in Table 2. Our proposed model signicantly outperforms the
baseline Tacotron2 + GST model for both zero-shot and model adaptation techniques.
This suggests that pitch contour conditioning in a multi-speaker setting helps improve
speech naturalness in addition to providing higher style similarity. It can be seen that the
naturalness is even further improved with model adaptation techniques since it allows the
generative model to adjust for the unseen speaker encodings.
5. Broader Impact
Speech interfaces enable hands-free operation and can assist users who are visually or phys-
ically impaired. Research into machine generation of speech is driven by the prospect of
oering services where humans interact solely with machines, thereby eliminating the cost
of live agents and signicantly reducing the cost of providing services. Since speech serves
as a primary communication interface between machine learning agents and humans, the
ability to speak expressively in a new voice can help create more personalized machine assis-Expressive Neural Voice Cloning
Cloning Task
Approach Text Imitation Style Transfer
Real data VCTK 4 :110:08
Real data Blizzard 4 :070:08
Tacotron2 + GST - Zero-shot 2 :670:10 2 :510:10 3 :020:09
Proposed Model - Zero-shot 3 :560:09 3 :540:10 3 :530:10
Proposed Model - Adaptation Whole 3 :750:09 3 :710:09 3 :600:09
Proposed Model - Adaptation Decoder 3 :610:09 3 :570:09 3 :450:09
Table 2: Mean Opinion Score (MOS) for speech naturalness with 95% condence intervals.
tants. Furthermore, such systems can also empower individuals who have lost their ability
to speak.
Explicit control over the style aspects of cloned speech is also desirable for several
multimedia applications. These include: voice overs in animated lms, synthesizing realistic
and expressive speech for videos, translating speech from one language to another while
preserving the speaking style and speaker identity, advertisement and political campaigns
with expressive speech in multiple voices or languages, etc.
Our intent for generating expressive speech is to advance the research of synthetic audio
generation, such that it can aid in the accessibility of speech interfaces and support users
with speech impairments, as well as contribute to mainstream use in movies, digital story-
telling and modern-day streaming services. This work provides us with an opportunity to
collaborate with researchers for advancing multi-disciplinary investigation of AI techniques.
However, any emerging technology can also be abused. Realistic voice cloning technology
can be used to create voice-overs for subjects of DeepFake videos, and has the potential to
be used maliciously to spread disinformation or for creating inappropriate content. Also,
the technology can be abused for circumventing speech based user authentication systems
in smart devices. We seek to discourage the unethical use of our technology. Upon the
release of public access to our voice cloning app, we plan to incorporate techniques to wa-
termark the speech generated by our model. This will allow us to thwart the misuse of our
technology and curb any spread of misinformation using our platform. It is our intention
to develop Expressive Voice Cloning in a way that its potential for abuse is minimized and
maximise its use as a tool for learning, education and experimentation.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
In this work we introduce an expressive voice cloning and dene three benchmark tasks
to evaluate such systems. We empirically nd that learning only latent style tokens is
insucient to capture expressiveness in speech when training the synthesis model on a
speaker-diverse dataset with mostly neutral prosody. Our proposed model uses a combina-
tion of heuristically derived and latent style information, which not only oers ne-grained
control over style aspects but also improves speech naturalness. We demonstrate that our
proposed model can successfully extract and transfer style and speaker characteristics fromNeekhara* Hussain* Dubnov Koushanfar McAuley
unseen audio references to the synthesized speech. We recommend future works on models
for predicting speaker specic pitch contours directly from style labels (like happy ,sad,
neutral etc) and text to allow control over expressions of the synthesized speech when a
style reference audio is not available.
References
Sercan Arik, Jitong Chen, Kainan Peng, Wei Ping, and Yanqi Zhou. Neural voice cloning
with a few samples. In NeurIPS . 2018.
Mengnan Chen, Minchuan Chen, Shuang Liang, Jun Ma, Lei Chen, Shaojun Wang, and
Jing Xiao. Cross-lingual, multi-speaker text-to-speech synthesis using neural speaker
embedding. In INTERSPEECH , 2019.
Wei Chu and Abeer Alwan. Reducing f0 frame error of f0 tracking algorithms under noisy
conditions with an unvoiced/voiced classication frontend. In ICASSP . IEEE, 2009.
J. S. Chung, A. Nagrani, and A. Zisserman. Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition. In
INTERSPEECH , 2018.
E. Cooper, C. Lai, Y. Yasuda, F. Fang, X. Wang, N. Chen, and J. Yamagishi. Zero-
shot multi-speaker text-to-speech with state-of-the-art neural speaker embeddings. In
ICASSP , 2020.
Alain De Cheveign e and Hideki Kawahara. Yin, a fundamental frequency estimator for
speech and music. 2002.
Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan Arik, Gregory Diamos, John Miller, Kainan Peng, Wei Ping,
Jonathan Raiman, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep voice 2: Multi-speaker neural text-to-speech.
InNIPS , 2017.
Daniel W. Grin, Jae, S. Lim, and Senior Member. Signal estimation from modied short-
time Fourier transform. IEEE Trans. Acoustics, Speech and Sig. Proc , 1984.
Y. Huang, L. He, W. Wei, W. Gale, J. Li, and Y. Gong. Using personalized speech synthesis
and neural language generator for rapid speaker adaptation. In ICASSP , 2020.
Keith Ito. The lj speech dataset. https://keithito.com/LJ-Speech-Dataset/ , 2017.
Ye Jia, Yu Zhang, Ron Weiss, Quan Wang, Jonathan Shen, Fei Ren, zhifeng Chen, Patrick
Nguyen, Ruoming Pang, Ignacio Lopez Moreno, and Yonghui Wu. Transfer learning from
speaker verication to multispeaker text-to-speech synthesis. In NeurIPS . 2018.
Simon J. King and Vasilis Karaiskos. The blizzard challenge 2013. In In Blizzard Challenge
Workshop , 2013.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR ,
2015.
Gilles Louppe. Master thesis : Automatic multispeaker voice cloning. 2019a.Expressive Neural Voice Cloning
Gilles Louppe. Resemblyzer - https://github.com/resemble-ai/Resemblyzer/ , 2019b. URL
https://github.com/resemble-ai/Resemblyzer/ .
Arsha Nagrani, Joon Son Chung, Weidi Xie, and Andrew Zisserman. Voxceleb: Large-scale
speaker verication in the wild. Computer Science and Language , 2019.
Tomohiro Nakatani, Shigeaki Amano, Toshio Irino, Kentaro Ishizuka, and Tadahisa Kondo.
A method for fundamental frequency estimation and voicing decision: Application to
infant utterances recorded in real acoustical environments. Speech Communication , 2008.
Paarth Neekhara, Chris Donahue, Miller Puckette, Shlomo Dubnov, and Julian McAuley.
Expediting TTS synthesis with adversarial vocoding. In INTERSPEECH , 2019.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: an
asr corpus based on public domain audio books. In ICASSP . IEEE, 2015.
Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan O Arik, Ajay Kannan, Sharan Narang,
Jonathan Raiman, and John Miller. Deep Voice 3: Scaling text-to-speech with convolu-
tional sequence learning. In ICLR , 2018a.
Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan O. Arik, Ajay Kannan, Sharan Narang,
Jonathan Raiman, and John L. Miller. Deep voice 3: 2000-speaker neural text-to-speech.
InICLR , 2018b.
Ryan Prenger, Rafael Valle, and Bryan Catanzaro. WaveGlow: A ow-based generative
network for speech synthesis. In ICASSP , 2018.
Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron J Weiss, Mike Schuster, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng
Yang, Zhifeng Chen, Yu Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, Rj Skerrv-Ryan, et al. Natural TTS
synthesis by conditioning WaveNet on mel spectrogram predictions. In ICASSP , 2018.
R. J. Skerry-Ryan, Eric Battenberg, Ying Xiao, Yuxuan Wang, Daisy Stanton, Joel Shor,
Ron J. Weiss, Rob Clark, and Rif A. Saurous. Towards end-to-end prosody transfer for
expressive speech synthesis with tacotron. arXiv:1803.09047 , 2018.
Daisy Stanton, Yuxuan Wang, and R. J. Skerry-Ryan. Predicting expressive speaking style
from text in end-to-end speech synthesis. arXiv:1803.09017 , 2018.
Rafael Valle, Jason Li, Ryan Prenger, and Bryan Catanzaro. Mellotron: Multispeaker
expressive voice synthesis by conditioning on rhythm, pitch and global style tokens.
ICASSP , 2020.
A aron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex
Graves, Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. WaveNet: A gener-
ative model for raw audio. arXiv:1609.03499 , 2016.
Christophe Veaux, Junichi Yamagishi, and Kirsten Macdonald. Cstr vctk corpus: English
multi-speaker corpus for cstr voice cloning toolkit. 2017.
Li Wan, Quan Wang, Alan Papir, and Ignacio Lopez Moreno. Generalized end-to-end loss
for speaker verication. arXiv:1710.10467 , 2017.Neekhara* Hussain* Dubnov Koushanfar McAuley
Yuxuan Wang, RJ Skerry-Ryan, Daisy Stanton, Yonghui Wu, Ron J Weiss, Navdeep Jaitly,
Zongheng Yang, Ying Xiao, Zhifeng Chen, Samy Bengio, et al. Tacotron: Towards end-
to-end speech synthesis. In INTERSPEECH , 2017.
Yuxuan Wang, Daisy Stanton, Yu Zhang, RJ Skerry-Ryan, Eric Battenberg, Joel Shor, Ying
Xiao, Fei Ren, Ye Jia, and Rif A. Saurous. Style tokens: Unsupervised style modeling,
control and transfer in end-to-end speech synthesis. arXiv:1803.09017 , 2018.
Heiga Zen, Viet Dang, Rob Clark, Yu Zhang, Ron J. Weiss, Ye Jia, Zhifeng Chen, and
Yonghui Wu. LibriTTS: A Corpus Derived from LibriSpeech for Text-to-Speech. In
INTERSPEECH , 2019. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2441.