42
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY 
AND WASTING TIME USING 
NLP: A COMPARATIVE 
APPROACH USING AI 
Arun Velu, 1 Dr. Pawan Whig 2
Director Equifax and Researcher, Atlanta , USA 1
Senior IEEE Member, Dean Research, Vivekananda Institute of 
Professional Studies, New Delhi, India 2Vivekananda Journal of Research
October, 2021, V ol. 10, Special Issue, Pg No.42-52
ISSN 2319-8702(Print)
ISSN 2456-7574(Online)
Peer Reviewed Refereed Journal
© Vivekananda Institute of Professional Studies
http://www.vips.edu/vjr.php
ABSTRACT
In one of the   research Study   Joe  et.  al  proposed  that   33% People classify SMS 
Spam as annoying  while about 25%  wasting time, and  nearly 22 % violating personal 
privacy . Spam is the  unwanted irritating email systems to indiscriminately send out 
spontaneous posts in wholesale. While e-mail spam is most well known, the term is 
used in other media  for similar abuses. Text  spam, generally unwanted bulk message 
with some business interest, is similar in the context of email spams. SMS spam is 
used to spread phishing links and commercial advertising. Commercial spammers use 
malware that is illegal in most countries to send SMS spam. Transfer unwanted spam 
on an endangered machine reduces the danger to the spammer, which complicates 
the origin of junk mail. The presence of known words, phrases, abbreviations and 
idioms can greatly influence the detection of SMS spam. The objective of this paper 
is to analyse and evaluate different classification techniques based on their accuracy, 
recall and CAP curves. There was a comparison between traditional methods of 
machine learning and deep learning.
Keywords: machine learning , spammer, malware, SMS
1. INTRODUCTION
Whenever SMS spam reaches the inbox of a user, the mobile phone alerts the user. If the user 
realizes that the message is unwanted, they are disappointed, and also some mobile telephone storage is 
carried out by SMS spam. The detection of SMS spam is an important task for identifying and filtering 
spam text messages. More SMS messages are sent daily so that a operator can  correlate newer SMS 
posts in the situation of previously conventional SMS messages. It is also very challenging. We thus 
attempt to advance a web-based SMS text junk mail or ham gauge by using the knowledge of artificial 
intelligence by combining machine learning and data mining. 
Electronic mail remains a very economical communication method, but hackers use it as a method 
for spreading the virus, phishing and malicious code, etc. Email is very useful and convenient to use, but 
many people misuse it too. Though there has been a steady increase in email use as well as the number 
of spams, other communication media like Facebook, Twitter, and chat programs. There has been an 
exponential increase in e-mail service. The average increase in the number of messages sent daily during 
2019 was 538.1 million since 2010. Spam volume during 2018 was 89-92%. 
Spam emails become one of the most serious issues for email users and affect email users 
negatively. HAM is a real email to receive and SPAM is a spurious mail to thousands of users with 43
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
bad intentions from unreliable sources in bulk. Spam is deliberately sent to users where it is not meant 
to be received by the recipient. Spam operators attempt by luring them with attractive offers to extract 
sensitive user data.
Because of the high number of methods for separating HAM and SPAM, a single method which 
can lead to a very small positive rate is difficult to narrow. Although many methods and algorithms are 
available to combat Spam Problem, there is no perfect single method or algorithm. During the isolation 
process, many HAM mails are marked as spam. This situation is called False by misrepresenting HAM 
as SPAM.
This research paper is organized in various sections. The first area focuses on associated work 
in the machine and non-machine learning processes used to classify e-mails as HAM or SPAM. The 
second section provides an insight into the collaborative approach and related work in this field. Spam 
control. The third section discusses the techniques of various machine learning algorithms   to find out 
comparative analysis and   to conclude which algorithm is best  in terms of accuracy and other factors.
2. VARIOUS METHODS FOR SPAM DETECTION
 ML and Non ML methods
Machine learning and non-machine learning are two major categories for spam filtering. Non-
machine learning methods use a spam filter procedure such as White-Listing, Black-List and keyword 
search . Non-machine teaching is easy to implement and to experiment, so spammers are highly likely 
to bypass non-machine teaching. However, a strong search for keywords and continuous updating of the 
whitelist and blacklist may still be more successful.
The approach to machine learning coincides greatly with the characterization of text and thus 
iterates researchers’ interest. Researchers have used many approaches in machine learning such as vector 
support, memory based learning, Ripper rules-based learning, boosting decision-making processes, hard 
sets, neural networks and Bayesian classifiers. Most approaches to email classification are based on a 
single text classification algorithm. Rough theory or rough theory-based methods for email classification 
are most popular among researchers. Emails are not written as they should be written when the malicious 
task is used. In such circumstances, emails are difficult to categorise, but the raw theory is quite inaccurate, 
inconsistent and unprecedented. Some researchers have used data mining methods, such as SVM, neural 
network, naive Bayesian and theoretical rough-set. The problem, however, was that these methods were 
employed with a set of rules. Researchers such as Chouchoulas, Zhao and Zhang, Zhao and Zhu have 
only experimented with spam rule generation keyword frequency.
 Cooperation approach
 Many solutions are available on standalone servers to classify spam. The solutions on stand-alone 
servers include Counter Attack, Opt-Outlist and Spam filter. Standalone servers have limited computing 
power and speed, so a new type of spam mail cannot be filtered by standalone servers. Any new mail 
type requires the creation and use of new rules. The collaborative approach has the necessary computing 
power and speed to produce and use new anti-spam rules as required.
 Spam prevention
SPAM may be handled in two different ways, i.e. at the place of origin, check and block spam 44
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
or during mail receipt. Spammers are aimed at servers that allow another server to use them as an 
intermediary channel. These low-security unattended servers are called . Because spammers use Botnets 
and the location of their origin constantly changes, spam can be easily checked at its origin. Some 
servers are black listing for SPAM spreading or used as a SPAM spreading channel. Since the source 
is not confident, the mail is called spam directly. On the internet, there are many open proxy servers. 
Spammers will also spread SPAM on these servers. When an open proxy server is used by spammers, 
the actual e-mail source is hard to identify. Once the email is sent to the mail server, the second method 
of verification and classification is HAM and SPAM.
PEAS Representation
PM : Performance Metrics  means  indicates How systematizes the AI distinguish it’s doing?
E: Environment tells  what situation in which the agent relates?
A: Actuators describes the  effect prepares AI have on surroundings?
S: Sensors is used  to gather AI data starting its surroundings?
The following is a PEAS summary of the classifier’s task environment:
Table 1 PEAS representation of AI Problem
 Description of algorithms
ML processes can be used to recognize junk mail or ham by appropriate scheme to the relevant 
labels and to make predictions or classifications by means of a trained model as the objective of the 
project will be to categorize the texts into junk mail or ham, which is the problems of Dual Grouping.
 Sack-up or Bagging
One of the important algorithm Bagging practices a modest method that appears repeatedly in 
statistical analyses — to improve one’s estimates by combining many estimates. Bagging constructs n 
classification trees by sampling bootstrap data and combines predictions in order to yield a concluding 
prediction.
 Random Forest (RF)
RF or forests of haphazard decision are a group technique of learning to classify the regression 
and to do other tasks by creating a multitude of decision-making trees and delivering the classes that 45
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
fashion the individual trees for classes (classification) or mean (regression). Random decision forests 
have the habit of overfitting their training set for decision-making bodies
 Naïve Bavarian (NB)
As their name implies, this algorithm assumes that each of the data sets’ variables is “Naïve,” 
i.e. not interconnected. The calculation of each hypothesis is simplified in order to make the calculation 
tractable. Naïve Bayes or Idiot Bayes are called. Naïve Bayes is an algorithm for viral classification 
which is used mainly to achieve the dataset’s basis accuracy. While the algorithm is naive, it is quicker 
than substantial data sets for SMS information to be classified on the basis of probability. This reduces 
the burden on the AI arrangement and retains the productivity efficient and controllable. Because of the 
lack of a well-trained Bayes classifier, they are relaxed and fast to implement. This allows real data to 
be tested without outlay much time and change emerging the model. They are prepared to predict when 
applied.
 Classification of Extra Trees
The Random Forest is like this. It produces several trees and splits nodes by using random sub-
sets of characteristics, but it does not bootstrap observations with two key differences (that is, samples 
with no substitution), and nodes are split in random splits and not in best divisions.
 Support Vector Machine (SVM)
Support-vector machines are supervised learning models that analyse data used for classification 
and regression analysis, with their associated learning algorithms. SVMs are also supported vector 
networks. In light of a number of training examples, each of which is marked as one category of two, 
and an SVM training algorithm creates a model that assigns new examples to a single category or another 
and makes it not likely to be a binary linear classification. SVM is a great way to classify binary data, as 
SVM categorizes facts by result the best plane and distinguishes facts points from the other class.
 KNN
Classification based on KNN K-Nearest in neighbouring countries is a kind of lethargic learning, 
because it fixes not attempt to shape a general internal model, but only stores training data instances. 
Classification of the k shall be calculated by simple majority vote of the closest neighbours. This algorithm 
is easy to implement, robust, bright and useful when there are extensive training data. The drawback is, 
however, that the value of K must be established and the calculation costs are high, since the detachment 
of each occurrence from all the training examples must be calculated.
 Decision  Tree 
The division criteria standard lies behind the intellect of any classification of the tab. Decision 
trees are similarly obtainable to a tree-structured current chart where the instances are classified according 
to their properties. An instance, the results of the trial labeled by the outlet and the leaf bump represent 
the class label, represents a node in a Decision Tree.
3. MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS
Information about dataset used can be given by using  following command 46
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
Bar graph representation of above data is obtained by using following commands
#Palette
cols= [“#E1F16B”, “#E598D8”] 
#first of all let us evaluate the target and find out if our data is imbalanced or not
plt.figure(figsize=( 12,8))
fg = sns.countplot(x= data[ “target” ], palette= cols)
fg.set_title( “Count Plot of Classes” , color=”#58508d”)
fg.set_xlabel( “Classes”, color=”#58508d”)
fg.set_ylabel( “Number of Data points” , color=”#58508d”)
after executing above commands we get 47
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
Figure 1  classiffication  of  data
The description of data  is  represented by 
data[ “No_of_Characters” ] = data[ “text” ].apply(len)
data[ “No_of_Words”]=data.apply( lambda  row: nltk.word_tokenize(row[ “text” ]), axis=1).
apply(len)
data[ “No_of_sentence” ]=data.apply( lambda  row: nltk.sent_tokenize(row[ “text” ]), axis=1).
apply(len)
data.describe().T
Top 10 Ham and Spam Words used are given by 
#for counting frequently occurence of spam and ham.
count1 = Counter( “ “.join(data[data[ ‘target’]==’ham’][“text” ]).split()).most_common( 10)
data1 = pd.DataFrame.from_dict(count1)
data1 = data1.rename(columns={ 0: “words of ham”, 1 : “count” })48
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
count2 = Counter( “ “.join(data[data[ ‘target’]==’spam’][“text” ]).split()).most_common( 10)
data2 = pd.DataFrame.from_dict(count2)
data2 = data2.rename(columns={ 0: “words of spam”, 1 : “count_” })
Figure 2 Frequency of ham words49
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
Figure 3  frequency  of spam words
4. ANALYSIS AND ASSESSING 
The following metrics were used to determine certain evaluation metrics:
We used accuracy as the primary evaluation criteria for our classifiers because it is an intuitive 
metric with a simple interpretation: simply counting correctly classified messages.
 Important Matrices 
To get the required information to validate any proposal or comparison, it is significant to select 
the precise performance metrics for setup. We consider the following known metrics in order to analyse 50
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
and compare the detection capacities of the classifiers considered:
 Accuracy 
Accuracy is the most intuitive performance measurement and simply a proportion with all the 
observations that have been accurately predicted. One could believe that if it is highly accurate, our 
model is best. Yes, accuracy is only a big step if the values of false positive and negative are almost 
identical, but only when you have symmetrical data sets. Therefore, you need to look at other parameters 
to assess the performance of your model.
 
  
The ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to the total predicted positive observations 
is known as precision. The question that this measure answers is how many of the passengers who were 
labelled as having survived really did. The low false positive rate is related to high precision. 
Precision  = 
 Recall  
It is also  called  sensitivity  and  defined as the correctly predicted ratio of positive observations 
to all actual class observations.
 
Table 2 Comparisons among  various algorithm
Algorithm 
Used True Positive False Negative False Positive True Negative
Naive Bayes 1425 15 14  218
SVM 1303 141 136 92
KNeighbors 1439 0 233 0
Decision Tree 1421 27 18 206
Extra Tree 1434 25 5 208
Random Forest 1437 32 2 201
AdaBoost 1417 36 22 197
Bagging 1422 27 17 206
Table 3 Comparison in terms of Accuracy ,Precision and Recall51
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
Algorithm Accuracy Precision Recall AR Posi-
tive 
Naïve bayes 98.7 0.98 0.93 0.92 0.94
SVM 98.9 0.96 0.98 0.93 0.98
KNeighbors 98.7 0.94 0.92 0.96 0.98
Decision Tree 98.5 0.97 0.96 0.96 0.94
Random Forest 98.0 0.95 0.98 0.93 0.95
AdaBoost 98.1 0.94 0.99 0.98 0.97
CNN 99.2 0.99 0.94 0.94 0.89
Bagging 98.2 0.94 0.99 0.99 0.99
5. RESULT AND CONCLUSION
This research  studies  focused on debating about how to protect personal privacy and wasting 
time  with the application of AI enabled technology and testing ML techniques for junk mail or Junk 
SMS detection.  Several algorithms  compared with different classifiers to see which one was the best. 
The results of our classifier evaluation show that the CNN Classifier achieves the highest accuracy of  99  
percent and  about 98 percent, respectively, for the  given dataset, with AR values of 0.99 . While CNN 
has been widely used in image classification, it has shown substantial improvements over predictable 
classifiers and achieves the maximum accurateness among them for word-based data as well. This 
achievement by CNN  greatly expanded the research area of its presentation to text-related classification 
issues, such as review classification and sentiment prediction. SVM and NB, as predicted, perform well 
among conventional classifiers, coming close to CNN for both datasets. Noteworthy outcomes have 
been got as a result of this work, indicating that this study can be applied in the real world to detect spams 
SMS. This research Study can be   very useful for the researchers  working in the same field.
 Future Scope
This research study can be helpful for the researchers working in the same field. Some  New 
Machine learning   or deep learning algorithm can  be   applied in order  to get more accurate result.
REFERENCE
[1]  H. Najadat, N. Abdulla, R. Abooraig, and S. Nawasrah, “Mobile SMS Spam Filtering based on 
Mixing Classifiers,” International Journal of Advanced Computing Research, vol. 1, 2014
[2]  J. Deng, H. Xia, Y. Fu, J. Zhou, and Q. Xia, “Intelligent spam filtering for massive short message 
stream,” COMPEL-The international journal for computation and mathematics in electrical and 
electronic engineering, vol. 32, pp. 586-596, 2013.
[3]  K. Yadav, P. Kumaraguru, A. Goyal, A. Gupta, and V. Naik, “SMSAssassin: Crowdsourcing 
Driven Mobile-based System for SMS Spam Filtering”, HotMobile’11 Proceedings of the 12th 
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, pp. 1-6, 2011.
[4]  B. S.-E. Kim, J.-T. Jo, and S.-H. Choi, “SMS Spam Filtering Using Keyword Frequency Ratio,” 
International Journal of Security and Its Applications, vol. 9, pp. 329-336, 2015.52
PROTECT PERSONAL PRIV ACY AND WASTING TIME USING NLP: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH USING AI 
[5]  T. M. Mahmoud and A. M. Mahfouz, “SMS Spam Filtering Technique Based on Artificial 
Immune,” IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, vol. 9, 2012.
[6]  Y . Yang and S. Elfayoumy, “Anti-Spam Filtering Using Neural Networks and Bayesian 
Classifiers”, Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE International Symposium on Computational 
Intelligence in Robotics and Automation, Jacksonville, FL, USA, June 20-23, 2007.
[7]  David Ndumiyana, Munyaradzi Magomelo, and Lucy Sakala, “Spam Detection using a Neural 
Network Classifier,” Online Journal of Physical and Environmental Science Research, vol. 2, 
issue 2, pp. 28-37, April 2013.
[8]  T. A. Almeida, J. M. G. Hidalgo, and A. Yamakami, “Contributions to the Study of SMS Spam 
Filtering: New Collection and Results (preprint),” Proceedings of the 11th ACM symposium on 
Document engineering, Mountain View, California, USA, pp. 259-262, 2011.
[9]  Pawan Whig and S. N Ahmad,” Modelling and Simulation of economical Water Quality 
Monitoring Device “, Journal of aquaculture & Marine Biology, 2016, Vol.4,Issue 6, pp.1-
6(Scopus).  ISSN: 2378-3184
[10] Pawan Whig and S. N Ahmad,” Controlling the Output Error for Photo Catalytic Sensor (PCS) 
Using Fuzzy Logic “, Journal of earth science and climate change , 2017, Vol.8,Issue 4, pp.1-6  
(Scopus).  ISSN: 2157-7617
[11] Sanobar Chouhan,  Saurabh Chodhary, Tarun Upadhaya Ajay Rupani  and Pawan Whig 
“Comparative Study of Various Gates Based in Different Technologies”, International Journal 
Robotics and Automation, Vol 3, Issue 1 , 2017 , pp. 1-7. ISSN: 0826-8185.(Scopus)
[12] Pawan Whig and S. N Ahmad,” Signal Conditioner Circuit for Water Quality Monitoring Device 
using Current Differencial Transconductance Amplifier”,  Information technology and electrical 
engineering Journal , Vol. 6,  Issue 2 , 2017. ISSN No. : 2306-708X 
[13] Pawan Whig, S N Ahmad and Anupam Priyam,” Simulation & performance analysis of 
various R2R D/A converter using various topologies ”, International Journal Robotics 
and Automation, Vol 2, Issue 1 , 2018 , pp. 128 -131. ISSN: 0826-8185.(Scopus) 