Recent advances in conversational NLP :
Towards the standardization of Chatbot building
Maali Mnasri
Opla / Clermont-Ferrand, France
maali@opla.ai
Abstract
Dialogue systems have become recently essen-
tial in our life. Their use is getting more and
more ﬂuid and easy throughout the time. This
boils down to the improvements made in NLP
and AI ﬁelds. In this paper, we try to provide
an overview to the current state of the art of
dialogue systems, their categories and the dif-
ferent approaches to build them. We end up
with a discussion that compares all the tech-
niques and analyzes the strengths and weak-
nesses of each. Finally, we present an opinion
piece suggesting to orientate the research to-
wards the standardization of dialogue systems
building.
1 Introduction
Conversational agents or dialogue systems, re-
ferred also as chatbots by the media and the in-
dustrials, have become very common in our ev-
eryday life. We encounter them, for example, in
our mobile phones as personal assistants or in e-
commerce websites as selling bots. These sys-
tems are intended to carry coherent conversations
with humans in natural language text or speech or
even both. Developing intelligent conversational
agents is still an unresolved research problem that
raises many challenges in the artiﬁcial intelligence
community. We try through this work to identify
the different existing algorithms to build chatbots.
We also classify the predominant approaches and
compare them according to the ﬁnal use case while
stating each approach strengths and weaknesses.
We aim at uncovering the issues related to this task
which can help researchers choose the future di-
rections in conversational NLP.
Although the ﬁrst chatbots have been developed
many years ago, this ﬁeld has never been more fo-
cused on than these last years. This can be ex-
plained by the recent development on AI and NLP
technologies as well as the data availability. Thecurrent scientiﬁc and technological landscape is
starting to get crowded with the variety of methods
to build chatbots (Gilbert et al., 2019; Haponchyk
et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019; Hwang et al., 2018)
while there is a lack of tools that can help re-
searchers and industrials focus on improving chat-
bots performance. We discuss this problem in sec-
tion 6. Our main contributions consist of :
analyzing the current scientiﬁc and techno-
logical state of the art of conversational sys-
tems
presenting a new vision towards the standard-
ization of conversational NLP
2 Chatbots categories
We choose to categorize chatbots into two major
types: social chatbots and task oriented chatbots.
2.1 Social chatbots
They are designed to carry unstructured human-
like conversations. They are considered as chit-
chat bots. Currently, such systems may have an
entertainment value but ﬁrstly, they were designed
as a testbed for psychological therapy and they
are still used, today, for this purpose. These sys-
tems (e.g., ELIZA (Weizenbaum, 1966), PARRY
(Colby, 1975), ALICE, CLEVER, Microsoft Lit-
tle Bing, etc) have taken the ﬁrst steps towards
conversational agents.
2.2 Task oriented chatbots
We also choose to classify them into two cate-
gories: generalist task oriented and specialist task
oriented chatbots.
2.2.1 Generalist task oriented chatbots
A generalist chatbot is supposed to answer to gen-
eral utterances. This feature is referred to as ”chit-
chat” and is designed to carry short conversations.arXiv:1903.09025v1  [cs.CL]  21 Mar 2019Beyond this social aspect, a generalist chatbot can
also accomplish simple tasks related to everyday
life such as setting the alarm, making a phone call,
sending a text, etc.
2.2.2 Specialist task oriented chatbots
Specialist chatbots are designed for a very particu-
lar task. They are provided with a speciﬁc domain
expertise that enables them to perform speciﬁc ac-
tions or to solve complex problems. A speciﬁc
task can be to book a ﬂight, to order food or even
to analyze health problems.
3 Chatbot building approaches
We describe in this section two of the main chatbot
building architectures: rule-based approches and
data-driven approaches. rule-based systems were
exploited. earlier and they rely on pattern-action
rules. On the other side, we ﬁnd the data-driven
approaches which rely on large conversations cor-
pora.
3.1 rule-based chatbots
Rule-based chatbots are designed to answer ques-
tions based on preﬁxed rules. During the dia-
logue, the bot follows speciﬁc rules to chat with
the user. For example, if the user utterance is part
of [Hello”, ”Good morning”, ”Hi”] then the chat-
bot should answer with ”Hello”. Rule-based chat-
bots are very popular in today’s market as they
are easy to build and performing for simple tasks.
However, performing complex tasks requires writ-
ing many rules which can be time consuming. De-
spite their simplicity, the ﬁrst proposed rule-based
chatbots in history are impressing. ELIZA is a
rule-based chatbot that simulates a Rogerian psy-
chotherapist (Weizenbaum, 1966). Its principle
consists in applying pattern and transform rules.
Each transform rule corresponds to a keyword.
Keywords are ranked from speciﬁc to general with
speciﬁc keywords being highly ranked. Then, in
each user utterance, the chatbot ﬁnds the keywords
with the highest rank in the knowledge base and
applies the transform rule according to the sen-
tence pattern. Let’s take the following sentence
as an example of the user utterance.
’You hate me’
This sentence matches the following pattern:
(0 YOU 0 ME)where 0 indicates a sequence of words with a vari-
able length. We suppose that the keyword YOU is
linked to the transform rule :
(0 YOU 0 ME)!(WHAT MAKES YOU
THINK I 3 YOU?)
where 3 refers to the third element in the pattern
which is, in this case, the second zero and corre-
sponds to the word ’hate’ in the source sentence.
Applying this rule leads to the following answer:
WHAT MAKES YOU THINK I hate YOU?
Following ELIZA, another system called PARRY
specialized in psychotherapy has been proposed
(Colby, 1975). PARRY uses rules similar to
ELIZA but is more sophisticated as it has affect
variables (e.g., anger, fear) that lead to more nu-
anced answers. These states are deﬁned using for-
mal logic rules.
3.2 Data-driven chatbots
Data-driven chatbots are the newest approaches
and the most used ones. The availability of text
datasets, in general, and conversational datasets,
in particular, allowed to apply data-driven ap-
proaches to text. While rule-based approaches
use hand-crafted rules to produce answers or even
questions, data-driven approaches use existing
human-human or bot-human conversations and/or
narrative documents to create the bot utterances.
In order to leverage the existing conversational
data, one can use whether Information Retrieval
(IR) or Machine Learning (ML). We will try, be-
low, to report the most popular and recent data-
driven approaches for chatbot building.
3.2.1 Information retrieval based chatbots
Among the ﬁrst IR chatbots, we can cite Clever-
Bot. It was created by Rollo Carpenter in 1988 and
published in 1997. CleverBot replies to questions
by identifying how a human responded to the same
question in a conversation database. Although it is
simplistic, CleverBot was used a lot.Information
retrieval chatbot models work pretty much as a
search engine where the query is the user turn and
the search result is the chatbot answer. Having a
Q-R1pairs dataset and question Q, the IR based
conversational model will look in the Q-R dataset
for the pair (Q’,R’) that best matches Q and returns
R as an answer to Q (Jafarpour et al., 2010; Leuski
and Traum, 2011). This can be considered as a
1Question-Replyway to mirror the training data. To achieve these
tasks, many retrieval baseline models have been
proposed. Word-level Vector space models have
been widely used with a cosine distance to ﬁnd the
best match Q-A pair (Banchs and Li, 2012). Other
works focused on using Term Frequency-Inverse
Document Frequency (TF-IDF) retrieval models
(Gandhe and Traum, 2013; Charras et al., 2016).
Galitsky and Ilvovsky (2017) proposed a chatbot
for customer support and product recommendation
that aims at helping users navigate to the exact
expected answer as fast as possible. To this end,
they suggest using discourse trees and particularly
Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann and Thomp-
son, 1988) to model the generalization or speciﬁ-
cation relations between the possible answers.
Regarding the data sources for creating dialogue
systems (Serban et al., 2015), WikiAnswers2, Ya-
hoo Answers3and twitter conversations are among
the most used open domain datasets for generalist
IR based chatbots. Some researchers have gone
beyond these datasets and applied the IR approach
to narrative text datasets such as Wikipedia (Isbell
et al., 2000; Yan et al., 2016).
3.2.2 Machine learning based chatbots
The problem of generating human-like conver-
sations has been modeled, lately, as the problem
of mapping a human turn to a machine turn
which is the target to be predicted. Most recent
works focused on applying deep learning models
but each of these formulates the problem in a
particular way and uses a different set of features.
Most used machine learning models are sequence-
to-sequence learning and reinforcement learning.
We describe them below.
Sequence to sequence learning
Sequence to sequence (seq2seq) learning
(Sutskever et al., 2014) represents a pattern
for using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) to
tackle complex sequence-to-sequence prediction
problems such as machine translation, image
captioning (Park et al., 2017), speech recognition
(Chorowski and Jaitly, 2016), text summarization
(Rush et al., 2015; Nallapati et al., 2016) and
question-answering. Seq2seq learning have
shown a great success when ﬁrst applied on
phrase to phrase machine translation (Cho et al.,
2014) and therefore, inspired researchers to apply
2http://www.answers.com/Q/
3https://answers.yahoo.com/?guccounter=1
Figure 1: Sequence to sequence architecture
it for other tasks.
For building chatbots, the problem was consid-
ered as translating the user utterance to the chatbot
answer. Currently seq2seq models hold the state-
of-the-art performance on chatbot building. These
models are trained to map input sequences to
output sequences. The length of the input and
output sequences can be different and this is
the strength of seq2seq models in comparison
with other neural learning models. Technically,
a seq2seq model is composed of an encoder and
a decoder. The encoder is a neural network that
reads the input sequence and converts it into
a hidden state called context vector or thought
vector because it stores the meaning of the input
sequence, considered as a thought. The decoder
is then fed with this context vector. During the
learning stage, it learns to map the hidden state
to the true output sequence. In the inference
stage, the decoder returns the predicted output
sequence with respect to the learning goal. Figure
1 shows an example of a sequence to sequence
architecture.
Vinyals and Le (2015a) proposed a straightfor-
ward data-driven approach where they trained a
seq2seq model on large conversational datasets to
predict the chatbot answer given the user question.
Their work showed that despite the simplicity of
the system, the seq2seq model was able to answer
simple questions, extract relevant information
from large corpus and perform shallow reason-
ing. However it is far from performing natural
conversations. A similar model has been trained
on TV shows and particularly on selected popular
characters (Nguyen et al., 2017). The trained
chatbots inherited successfully the identity and the
personality of the target character which shows
that these models can capture many aspects.
Hu et al. (2018) proposed a modiﬁcation to theseq2seq model so it captures the tone in customer
care conversations (e.g., neutral, passionate,
empathetic, etc.) and takes it into account by
generating toned answers. In the learning step,
the seq2seq model is fed with not only pairs of
user-agent turns but also with the corresponding
tone of the ﬁrst speaker. Considering the history
as a context in seq2seq models led to some im-
provement over context-independent models but
suffers from the highly general answers (Sordoni
et al., 2015).
Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning enables the machine to
learn in the same way humans do, that is to say,
by interacting with the surrounding environment.
The learning process aims at maximizing a notion
of cumulative reward. After each interaction,
the agent observes the results of its action and
receives accordingly a reward which can be
positive or negative.
To train a dialogue system with reinforcement
learning, the chatbot is put in use by the end users
to become increasingly efﬁcient throughout the
conversations. Previously to the development of
neural networks, the problem of dialogue systems
have been modeled as Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) (Levin et al., 1998) in order to use
reinforcement learning. The system is represented
by a set of states that correspond to the entire
dialogue, and by a set of actions representing
the system answers. The goal is to maximize
the reward obtained for fulﬁlling users requests.
This dialogue manager is preceded by an SLU
(Speech Language Understanding) component
and succeeded by an NLG (Natural Language
Generation) component.
Later, dialogue systems have been modeled
using Partially Observed Markov Decision Pro-
cesses (POMDPs) (Roy et al., 2000; Young, 2002;
Williams and Young, 2007; Young et al., 2013;
Gai et al., 2013). This approach assumes that
dialogue starts in an initial state s0. Succeeding
states are modeled by a transition probability
p(stjst 1; at 11)where stis the state at time t
andatis the action taken at time t. The state stis
partially observable to take into account the error
rate of the language understanding framework. To
this end, at each turn, the user input is converted
to an observation with probability p(otjst)
where otis the observation at time t. Thetransition and observation probability stochastic
functions represent the dialogue model M. The
possible system actions are delegated to another
stochastic model encoding the policy P. During
the dialogue, a reward is assigned to the system at
each utterance in a way to favor the ideal behavior
of the dialogue system. The dialogue model
and the policy model are optimized by summing
up the cumulated rewards during the dialogue.
Reinforcement learning consists of learning the
best policy through reward system. This process
can be learned on-line or off-line.
3.2.3 Hybrid approaches
Each of the described approaches has its own lim-
its and strengths. In order to take the best part
of each method, many studies focused on combin-
ing different approaches: machine learning and IR
or seq2seq and reinforcement learning. Seq2seq
generative models have been combined to IR ap-
proaches. This is the case of the Alibaba shop-
ping assistant (Qiu et al., 2017) that uses an IR
approach to retrieve the best candidates from the
knowledge base then, the seq2seq model is used
to re-rank the candidates and generate the answer.
Cui et al. (2017a) propose a meta-engine customer
service chatbot composed of four sub-engines. A
fact QA engine answers questions about the prod-
uct details found in the product page using a deep
structured semantic model (Huang et al., 2013) for
matching the question to the product attributes. A
FAQ search engine maps the questions to the exist-
ing questions in the FAQ by training a regression
model using many semantic similarity measures.
Another engine leverages the customers reviews
to answer opinion-oriented questions. Finally, a
chit-chat engine consisting of an attention based
seq2seq model is trained on twitter conversations
to answer greeting and thanking queries. Li et al.
(2016) highlighted the fact that seq2seq predict an-
swers only one at a time and fail to predict their
inﬂuence on the future utterances. They suggested
a novel model that leverages the seq2seq ability
to represent semantics and combines it to a rein-
forcement learning policy which optimizes long-
term rewards according to the developer goal. Ex-
tending seq2seq models with history trackers and
database information has also shown an improve-
ment over basic seq2seq where only the user intent
is decoded (Wen et al., 2016).4 Chatbots evaluation
Chatbots can be evaluated through human evalu-
ation. To this end, human judges are asked to
score the chatbot performance on different crite-
ria or to compare the chatbot answers to another
chatbot answers. While it provides a high qual-
ity evaluation, human evaluation remains very ex-
pensive in time and human resources and cannot
scale well. Some IR based chatbots can be eval-
uated using simple precision and recall metrics as
they operate as a search engine. Recently , auto-
matic evaluation approaches have been tested such
as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and ROUGE (Lin,
2004) which are used respectively for automatic
translation and text summarization. These metrics
work by computing the n-gram overlap between
the output of a system and a set of references. For
chatbot evaluation, these metrics have been used
to compare the chatbot answers to human answers
to the same question. N-gram overlap based met-
rics has limits in dialogue systems evaluation as
two answers can be totally different but have the
same meaning.
Perplexity (Manning et al., 1999) has also been
used to evaluate chatbots (Vinyals and Le, 2015b;
Yao et al., 2016; Serban et al., 2017; Cui et al.,
2017b). Used originally to evaluate language
models, perplexity measures how well a language
model predicts the probability of words in the test
set. If we suppose that the test set is composed of
fw1; w2; :::; ; w Ngthe perplexity of the language
model that should predict the probability of these
words is:
Perplexity =e 1
NP
ilog(Pwi))(1)
This means the lower the perplexity score the bet-
ter. More recent studies suggested new evaluation
metrics inspired by the Turing test consisting of
training a classiﬁer to distinguish system answers
from human answers (Li et al., 2017).
5 Discussion
All the described methods have their own weak-
nesses and strengths. Choosing one approach
or another depends deeply on the available data
format for training (structured or unstructured).
It depends also on the chatbot end-use. Some
approaches may be performing for a chit-chat
engine as a purely data-driven seq2seq model but
not for a domain speciﬁc task oriented chatbot.rule-based approaches are straightforward but
efﬁcient for simple use cases. They can also
be used jointly with data-driven approaches to
handle mandatory scenarios that arent present
in the knowledge base. Rules can also be used
to support data-driven methods to guarantee a
security level, especially, in industrial cases where
machine learning, on its own, cannot be fully
trusted. IR methods are the best when it comes
to selecting the best piece of information from
structured data to respond to a user query. While
IR methods can be very performing in many
cases, they need an extra component that adapts
the form of the retrieved/selected information to
be suitable as an answer. Moreover, purely IR
based methods don’t perform reasoning and are
then perfect to mirror existing knowledge, not
more.
Machine learning based approaches are
the dominating methods now in chatbot build-
ing. While reinforcement learning has been the
main used learning method in dialogue systems
for years, the encoder-decoder learning is now
taking the lead. Reinforcement learning has been
widely used in robotics as it allows the robot to
be autonomous. The same thing is noticed in
chatbot systems. Reinforcement learning leads to
a more natural chatbot as it learns from human
feedback and develops its own control system.
Reinforcement learning enables the chatbot to
handle a long conversation and takes into account
the preceding turns. It is also convenient to use RL
to make chatbots learn to act and not only to chat.
For example, a ﬂight booking agent will receive
a reward if it properly books a ﬂight according
to the user request and will get penalized if it
makes an error. However, RL raises two main
issues. Firstly, it needs so much time and so many
interactions until the agent is trained which may
be restricting if the training is online. Secondly,
RL is not most suitable option to learn language
generation. That is the reason behind the glory of
the generative seq2seq models that have partially
solved the problem. Seq2seq models are, usually,
trainable end-to-end without any hand-crafted
rules. Despite their success, seq2seq models have
also some weaknesses. The basic seq2seq models
are effective however they are more performing in
generalist chatbots than in task oriented chatbots.
Another problem is that these models tend toreturn very generic answers (Sordoni et al., 2015)
because of the high number of generic sentences
in the training data and the objective function
of the seq2seq models. Besides, these models
don’t take repetition into account. For example,
if the chatbot says ”goodbye” and the user replies
with goodbye”, than it is possible that the chatbot
answers again with a ”goodbye”. This is a simple
example that can be handled easily but it is just
to show how the chatbot can be stuck in a loop.
Hybrid systems that combine RL with seq2seq or
those who extend seq2seq models with external
information (e.g., a database) seem to overcome
some of the listed problems or at least to produce
a more performing chatbot.
6 Opinion piece : towards the
standardization of the ﬁeld
Recently, AI researchers have started to pay more
attention to conversational agents and attempts
to build strong chatbot systems are being pub-
lished increasingly. Since this ﬁeld is not tech-
nologically mature we can obviously notice the
lack of standard open source tools or models that
can help scientists save time on the implementa-
tion step. For example, there is a common part
among all the chatbot systems : the chatbot en-
gine. This part represent the backbone of the
chatbot system and should be independent from
the used approach (ML or rule-based). Unfortu-
nately, the distinction between the generic chatbot
engine and the conversational NLP protocol is not
always established. As a consequence, a repeti-
tive work is done by each member of the com-
munity by building chatbot systems from scratch
every time an approach is proposed. While some
code blocks are available to reuse, one should in-
vest time to understand the code and adapt it to
his CNLP techniques. This process slows down
the progress in the chatbot ﬁeld. If we take a look
at other research ﬁelds we can observe the estab-
lishment of some well known standards that al-
lowed to make huge steps on the related ﬁeld. For
example, the available open source standards for
Machine Learning and Deep Learning techniques
(e.g., TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016)) allowed
the researchers to explore a multitude of applica-
tions and that has contributed to many advances
in different ﬁelds. By analogy, we can say that
there’s a need to such an open source standard
for the CNLP ﬁeld. Considering these facts, wethink future studies on chatbot systems should fo-
cus on setting up standard frameworks and archi-
tectures for conversational agents. Such standards
should be interoperable and should allow NLP re-
searchers to plug their NLP in it.
7 Conclusion
In the light of these observations, we believe that
developing a natural conversational agent cannot
be solved with one simple model. As was the case
with many problems, system aggregation usually
leads to better results than each system alone. Fu-
ture works should maybe focus on ﬁnding the best
way to combine the different approaches to chat-
bot building in order to take better advantage of
each method, even the simplest ones.
On the other hand, the diversity of the approaches
for chatbot building and the growing interest to
this ﬁeld suggest to start thinking about setting
standard tools and platforms to boost the develop-
ment of this domain and help the scientiﬁc com-
munity focus on new models.
References
Mart ´ın Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng
Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin,
Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard,
et al. 2016. Tensorﬂow: A system for large-scale
machine learning. In 12thfUSENIXgSymposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(fOSDIg16), pages 265–283.
Rafael E Banchs and Haizhou Li. 2012. IRIS: a chat-
oriented dialogue system based on the vector space
model. pages 37–42. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Franck Charras, G Dubuisson Duplessis, Vincent
Letard, Anne-Laure Ligozat, and Sophie Rosset.
2016. Comparing system-response retrieval models
for open-domain and casual conversational agent.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merrinboer, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger
Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning
phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder
for statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1406.1078 .
Jan Chorowski and Navdeep Jaitly. 2016. Towards
better decoding and language model integration
in sequence to sequence models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.02695 .
Kenneth Mark Colby. 1975. Artiﬁcial paranoia: A
computer simulation of paranoid processes , vol-
ume 49. Elsevier.Lei Cui, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, Chuanqi Tan,
Chaoqun Duan, and Ming Zhou. 2017a. Su-
perAgent: A Customer Service Chatbot for E-
commerce Websites. Proceedings of ACL 2017, Sys-
tem Demonstrations , pages 97–102.
Lei Cui, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, Chuanqi Tan,
Chaoqun Duan, and Ming Zhou. 2017b. Supera-
gent: A customer service chatbot for e-commerce
websites. Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demon-
strations , pages 97–102.
Boris Galitsky and Dmitry Ilvovsky. 2017. Chatbot
with a Discourse Structure-Driven Dialogue Man-
agement. pages 87–90.
Sudeep Gandhe and David Traum. 2013. Surface text
based dialogue models for virtual humans. pages
251–260.
Milica Gai, Catherine Breslin, Matthew Henderson,
Dongho Kim, Martin Szummer, Blaise Thomson,
Pirros Tsiakoulis, and Steve Young. 2013. On-
line policy optimisation of bayesian spoken dialogue
systems via human interaction. pages 8367–8371.
IEEE.
Mazin Gilbert, Esther Levin, Michael Lederman
Littman, and Robert E Schapire. 2019. Learning
from interactions for a spoken dialog system. US
Patent App. 15/483,213.
Iryna Haponchyk, Antonio Uva, Seunghak Yu, Olga
Uryupina, and Alessandro Moschitti. 2018. Super-
vised clustering of questions into intents for dialog
system applications. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 2310–2321.
Tianran Hu, Anbang Xu, Zhe Liu, Quanzeng You, Yu-
fan Guo, Vibha Sinha, Jiebo Luo, and Rama Akki-
raju. 2018. Touch Your Heart: A Tone-aware Chat-
bot for Customer Care on Social Media. page 415.
ACM.
Po-Sen Huang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng,
Alex Acero, and Larry Heck. 2013. Learning deep
structured semantic models for web search using
clickthrough data. pages 2333–2338. ACM.
Inchul Hwang, Heesik Jeon, Hyung Rai Oh,
Donghyeon Lee, Munjo Kim, and Jihie Kim.
2018. Chatti: A conversational chatbot platform. In
Workshops at the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Charles Lee Isbell, Michael kearns, Dave Kormann,
Satinder Singh, and Peter Stone. 2000. Cobot in
LambdaMOO: A social statistics agent. pages 36–
41.
Sina Jafarpour, Christopher JC Burges, and Alan Rit-
ter. 2010. Filter, rank, and transfer the knowledge:
Learning to chat. Advances in Ranking , 10:2329–
9290.Anton Leuski and David Traum. 2011. NPCEditor:
Creating virtual human dialogue using information
retrieval techniques. Ai Magazine , 32(2):42–56.
Esther Levin, Roberto Pieraccini, and Wieland Eckert.
1998. Using Markov decision process for learn-
ing dialogue strategies. volume 1, pages 201–204.
IEEE.
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Michel Galley,
Jianfeng Gao, and Dan Jurafsky. 2016. Deep rein-
forcement learning for dialogue generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.01541 .
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Tianlin Shi, Sbastien Jean, Alan
Ritter, and Dan Jurafsky. 2017. Adversarial learn-
ing for neural dialogue generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.06547 .
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. Text Summarization
Branches Out .
William C Mann and Sandra A Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text-Interdisciplinary Jour-
nal for the Study of Discourse , 8(3):243–281.
Christopher D Manning, Christopher D Manning, and
Hinrich Sch ¨utze. 1999. Foundations of statistical
natural language processing . MIT press.
Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Caglar Gulcehre, and
Bing Xiang. 2016. Abstractive text summarization
using sequence-to-sequence rnns and beyond. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1602.06023 .
Huyen Nguyen, David Morales, and Tessera Chin.
2017. A Neural Chatbot with Personality.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics , pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Chunseong Cesc Park, Byeongchan Kim, and Gunhee
Kim. 2017. Attend to you: Personalized image cap-
tioning with context sequence memory networks.
Minghui Qiu, Feng-Lin Li, Siyu Wang, Xing Gao, Yan
Chen, Weipeng Zhao, Haiqing Chen, Jun Huang,
and Wei Chu. 2017. Alime chat: A sequence to se-
quence and rerank based chatbot engine. volume 2,
pages 498–503.
Nicholas Roy, Joelle Pineau, and Sebastian Thrun.
2000. Spoken dialogue management using proba-
bilistic reasoning. pages 93–100. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Alexander M Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason We-
ston. 2015. A neural attention model for ab-
stractive sentence summarization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.00685 .Iulian V Serban, Chinnadhurai Sankar, Mathieu Ger-
main, Saizheng Zhang, Zhouhan Lin, Sandeep Sub-
ramanian, Taesup Kim, Michael Pieper, Sarath
Chandar, Nan Rosemary Ke, et al. 2017. A deep
reinforcement learning chatbot. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.02349 .
Iulian Vlad Serban, Ryan Lowe, Peter Henderson, Lau-
rent Charlin, and Joelle Pineau. 2015. A survey of
available corpora for building data-driven dialogue
systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.05742 .
Alessandro Sordoni, Michel Galley, Michael Auli,
Chris Brockett, Yangfeng Ji, Margaret Mitchell,
Jian-Yun Nie, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. 2015.
A neural network approach to context-sensitive gen-
eration of conversational responses. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.06714 .
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. pages 3104–3112.
Oriol Vinyals and Quoc Le. 2015a. A neural conversa-
tional model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05869 .
Oriol Vinyals and Quoc Le. 2015b. A neural conversa-
tional model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05869 .
Joseph Weizenbaum. 1966. ELIZAa computer pro-
gram for the study of natural language communica-
tion between man and machine. Communications of
the ACM , 9(1):36–45.
Tsung-Hsien Wen, David Vandyke, Nikola Mrksic,
Milica Gasic, Lina M Rojas-Barahona, Pei-Hao Su,
Stefan Ultes, and Steve Young. 2016. A network-
based end-to-end trainable task-oriented dialogue
system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.04562 .
Jason D Williams and Steve Young. 2007. Partially
observable Markov decision processes for spoken
dialog systems. Computer Speech & Language ,
21(2):393–422.
Zhao Yan, Nan Duan, Junwei Bao, Peng Chen, Ming
Zhou, Zhoujun Li, and Jianshe Zhou. 2016. Doc-
chat: An information retrieval approach for chatbot
engines using unstructured documents. volume 1,
pages 516–525.
Kaisheng Yao, Baolin Peng, Geoffrey Zweig, and
Kam-Fai Wong. 2016. An attentional neural con-
versation model with improved speciﬁcity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.01292 .
Steve Young. 2002. Talking to machines (statistically
speaking).
Steve Young, Milica Gai, Blaise Thomson, and Jason D
Williams. 2013. Pomdp-based statistical spoken di-
alog systems: A review. Proceedings of the IEEE ,
101(5):1160–1179.Zhou Yu, Vikram Ramanarayanan, Patrick Lange, and
David Suendermann-Oeft. 2019. An open-source
dialog system with real-time engagement tracking
for job interview training applications. In Ad-
vanced Social Interaction with Agents , pages 199–
207. Springer.