 
The Dutch AIBO Team 2004 
 
Stijn Oomes1, Pieter Jonker2, Mannes Poel3,  
Arnoud Visser4, Marco Wiering5
 
1 March 2004 
 
1 DECIS Lab, Delft Cooperation on Intelligent Systems  
2 Quantitative Imaging Group, Depar tment of Applied Physics, Delft University of Technology  
3 Human Media Interaction, Department of Computer Science, University of Twente  
4 Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Department of Computer Science, University of Amsterdam  
5 Intelligent Systems Group, Department of Co mputer Science, University of Utrecht 
 
http://aibo.cs.uu.nl 
stijn.oomes@decis.nl  
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
At the end of last year, several institutes in the Netherlands have joined forces and formed 
The Dutch AIBO Team.  We are a group of researchers and students from the universities of 
Amsterdam, Delft, Twente and Utrecht, and the DECIS Lab. Our goal is to stimulate 
research, teaching, and applications in the fields of artificial intelligence and collaborative 
robotics in the Netherlands by joining the international RoboCup community. 
 
Our team combines a group of senior researchers with a strong research record and a long experience in robot soccer competitions, with a diverse group of the most talented students in the country. Since we are distributed across the Netherlands, we have chosen a modular 
architecture that allows us to develop our innovations in parallel. 
 
This paper explains that our team has the right qualifications to compete in the Four-legged 
Robot League of RoboCup 2004. We have chosen a promising approach to the AIBO team architecture which will position us as a serious competitor. 
 
 
2.  Team 
 
Since we consider our project to be a long term endeavor, we have set up a professional project organization. The Dutch AIBO Team consists of different sub-teams that all have their 
specific goals and responsibilities. The coordination of all activities is in the hands of the 
people at the DECIS Lab. Since this lab is itself a cooperation of multiple institutes, there is a lot of experience and know-how on coordinating large multi-partner projects. 
 
The research  team consists of the authors of this paper and our job is to keep an eye on the 
long term research goals. We all have well established positions and research programs at our respective institutions. Though using the AIBO as a platform is new for most of us, we have a long joint experience in robot soccer competitions (see Appendix A). Here we summarize our research programs and relevant courses: 
 
Amsterdam 
The Intelligent Autonomous Systems group st udies methodologies to create intelligent 
autonomous systems, which perceive their environment through sensors and use that 
information to generate intelligent, goal-directed behavior. This work includes formalization, 
generalization, and learning of goal-directed be havior in autonomous systems. The focus is on 
perception for autonomous systems, learning and neuro-computing, principles of autonomous systems and hardware and software systems. In this year’s Autonomous Systems course, 10 
students divided into 2 teams worked full-time for 4 weeks on understanding and programming 
the AIBO ERS-7. 
 
Delft 
The Quantitative Imaging Group (formerly know n as Pattern Recognition Group) studies a 
wide variety of methodologies and applications in the field of image processing and pattern 
recognition. Within the fields of industrial in spection and robot vision, we focus on the themes 
"vision based motion & motion based vision", "sensor data fusion", and "hardware 
architectures for real-time imaging". Within the AIBO project we have assigned one MSc 
student (~1 year) on the subject of high speed ro bust color vision. Furthermore a second year 
BSc project is assigned to the project (4 months, 6 students) with the task to look at: inventory 
and testing of all available AIBO motions, dynam ic system simulations of AIBO motions, and 
suitability of AIBO's for 1st y ear programming practical work. 
 
Twente 
The Human Media Interaction group studies the interaction between men and machines. 
Computers operate in every day life as unive rsal media machines presenting multi-media 
information and as communication devices connecting people. The interface is what presents 
users with information and what allow users to manipulate and command the machine. This 
has become a prominent topic of concern to researchers and designers. One of our research 
streams is intelligent agents and collaborative autonomous systems. We use AIBOs in our courses on process control & robotics, and on mult i agent systems, and in thesis assignments. 
 
Utrecht 
The main focus of the research group is on logic and multi-agent systems. The group has 
developed its own agent-programming language, call ed 3APL, which provides a logical basis 
for building (communicating) agents. Other area s of research are reinforcement learning, 
neural networks, and genetic algorithms. Both approaches to AI are currently being tested in a 
number of different robots. This year's Software Project course has assigned 9 BSc students 
to work on the motion modules for 20 hours a week, from February until the end of June.  
 
DECIS 
This cooperation between the universities of  Delft and Amsterdam, the Netherlands 
Organisation for Applied Research, and Thales Re search & Technology focus their research 
on collaborative decision making, and collaborat ive cognition and robotics. The application 
domains are for example disaster response, the virtual office, and traffic control.  
 
Those of us with appointments at universities use the AIBOs as a robot platform in our 
courses and thesis assignments. This allows us to easily recruit talented students for The 
Dutch AIBO Team . Our development  team consists of these (groups of) students that, due 
to the modular architecture approach, focus on different aspects of the system (see the 
detailed description in the next section). Students therefore compete against each other to 
come up with the best solution for a particular problem, e.g. dribbling with the ball. The best 
code will end up in the next competition version of our overall implementation. 
 
The competition  team, the people that are actually taking part in RoboCup 2004, will be 9 
students and one team leader. The selection of students from the development team is based on the premise that everyone who is joining the team has to bring something special 
to the team; we use the available slots as a motivator for the students. In this way, we aim to 
build a proper team of developers that will be able to truly collaborate during the tense days of the competition. 
 
In summary, the strength of our team is that we combine the experience and stability of 
senior researchers with the enthusiasm and creativity of students. Because of multiple 
institutions we are able to tap into a large pool of bright students. The activities of our team are embedded both in our research & development programs and our academic curricula. 3.  Approach 
 
In the spirit of RoboCup, we take full advantage of the availability of the code of last year’s 
contestants. Because of the similar organization of the GermanTeam 2003, we decided to use their approach in our first year to allow us a kick start. Since we have acquired 14 ERS-7 AIBO robots, we had to port the code that was developed for ERS-210 AIBOs to the new platform. In order to gain some wider experience, we also ported the code from CMUPack 2003 to the ERS-7. 
 
Presently, we are in the situation that we have successfully ported the code to the ERS-7 and are now in the process of dividing tasks among the project partners. Depending on the interest of the different groups, they will work on different modules. Our method will be to give the same problem to different groups (usually a few students). We will then choose the 
best solution(s) to be a part of the official version of our code. 
 
In the current architecture, the main modules are: vision, localization, behavior control, and 
motion. We will combine the solutions that are implemented in the GermanTeam code with the ideas and experiences in the different labs on other platforms (mainly middle sized and simulation leagues). The main expertise and goals of the different labs are: 
 
Amsterdam 
The Intelligent Autonomous Systems group is interested to formalize the information 
acquisition on the objects in the soccer wo rld, which allows learning, and adapting the 
methods that combine the measurements from different sources, locations and moments. 
 
Delft 
The focus of the Quantitative Imaging Group is on calibrationless color segmentation based on 
emergent behavior, sensor data fusion for ambi ent intelligence and dynamic system modeling 
and reinforcement learning to pre-train vision based robot motions with a simulator and post-
train the robots on the field. We will start with calibrationless color vision. 
 
Twente 
Focus of the Human Media Interaction group is  on methods and models for action selection, 
decision making, multi agent planning, and coopera tion. Furthermore, adaptivity is a research 
topic, especially learning in multi agent systems in order to increase the effectiveness of the 
team by, among other things, learning opponent behavior models. 
 
Utrecht 
We focus on intelligent behavior of the team of robots. This covers making the translation from 
a world model to a set of desirable actions, and communication between agents. We will use the predictive decision model of UvA Trilearn (winner of the RoboCup Simulation League in 
2003) to improve the cooperation between the ro bots. Furthermore, we also aim to enhance 
the movement techniques, making AIBOs move and kick faster and more efficiently. 
 
DECIS 
The interest of the DECIS Lab is in collaborative  behavior of the group of AIBOs, with a focus 
on flexible role assignment, inference of opponent’s  strategy, strategy or tactics switching. 
 
We are attending the German Open 2004 and are planning to evaluate and benchmark the 
performance of the currently available solutions. 
 
The strength of our proposed approach is that we combine the available implementation of 
the GermanTeam 2003, the experience that we have gained in other leagues, and a pool of talented students that are already well informed about the ins- and outs of both the German 
and the CMU code. The modular approach allows us to develop and improve components of 
the architecture in different labs simultaneously. Appendix A - Competitions 
 
Amsterdam 
Soccer Simulation League  (team: UvA Trilearn)  
RoboCup 2003, 1st place 
American Open 2003, 1st place 
German Open 2003, 1st place 
RoboCup 2002, 4th place 
German Open 2002, 1st place 
RoboCup 2001, 4th place 
German Open 2001, 5th place 
RoboCup 1999, 9th place 
RoboCup 1998, 3rd place 
 
Rescue Simulation League (team: UvA C2003) 
RoboCup 2003, 16th place 
German Open 2003, 2nd place 
 
Delft & Amsterdam 
Soccer Middle Size League (team: Clockwork Orange) 
German Open 2003, quarter final 
German Open 2002, 4th place 
RoboCup 2001, quarterfinal 
German Open 2001, quarterfinal 
European Championship 2000, quarterfinal 
 
Twente 
Mirosot Middle Size League (team: MiroSot ?) 
FIRA World Championship 2004 
FIRA European Championship 2003, 4th place 
 
Utrecht 
Rescue Simulation League  (team: BanzAI)  
RoboCup 2003, 18th place 
 
DECIS & Amsterdam 
Robot Rescue League (team: Zeppelins) 
RoboCup 2003, Round Robin 
 
 
Appendix B - Publications 
 
J. Kok, Multi-robot decision making using co ordination graphs, Proceedings of the 11th 
International Conference on Advanced Ro botics, Coimbra, Portugal, 2003.      
 
F.C.A. Groen, M.T.J. Spaan, and N.  Vlassis. Robot soccer game or science. In M. Ivanescu, 
editor, Proceedings CNR-2002, p. 92-98. Edit ura Universitaria Craiova, October 2002. 
ISBN:973-8043-165-5. 
 
Nikos Vlassis and Matthijs T. J. Spaan. A fast point-based algorithm for  
POMDPs. In Benelearn 2004: Proceedings of the Annual Machine Learning  
Conference of Belgium and the Netherlands, pages 170-176, Brussels,  
Belgium, January 2004 
 
Roland Bunschoten and Ben Kröse. Visual odometry from an omnidirectional  
vision system. In Proceedings of the International Conference on  
Robotics and Automation ICRA'03, pages 577-583, Taipei, Taiwan, 2003.  
ISBN 0-7803-7737-0 
 
J. Caarls, P.P. Jonker, and S. Persa,  Sensor Fusion for Augmented  Reality, in: Emile Aarts, Rene Collier, Evert van Loenen, Boris de  
Ruyter (eds.), Ambient Intelligence (P roc. 1st European Symposium EUSAI  
2003, Veldhoven, Netherlands, Nov.3-4) , Lecture Notes in Computer  
Science, vol. 2875, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2003, 160-176 
 
W. Caarls, P.P. Jonker, and H. Co rporaal, Benchmarks for SmartCam  
Development, Proceedings of Acivs 2003, Advanced Concepts for  
Intelligent Vision Systems (Ghent, Sep.2-5), Ghent University, Ghent, B,  
2003, 81-86 
 
P.P. Jonker and W. Caarls, App lication Driven Design of Embedded  
Real-Time Image Processors, Proceedings of Acivs 2003, Advanced Concepts  
for Intelligent Vision Systems (Ghent, Sep.2-5), Ghent University,  
Ghent, B, 2003, 1-8 
 
P.P. Jonker, S. Persa, J. Caar ls, F. de Jong, and R.L. Lagendijk,  
Philosophies and technologies for ambient aware devices in wearable  
computing grids, Computer Communicati ons, vol. 26, no. 11 (Special Issue  
on Ubiquitous Computing, Edited by T. Pfeifer), 2003, 1145-1158 
 
Jelle R. Kok, Matthijs T.J. Spaan,  and Nikos Vlassis. Multi-robot  
decision making using coordination graphs. In A.T. de Almeida and U.  
Nunes, editors, Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on  
Advanced Robotics, ICAR'03, pages 11 24-1129, Coimbra, Portugal, June  
30-July 3 2003. IEEE Pr ess. ISBN 972-96889-9-0 
 
S. Persa and P.P. Jonker, Real-time computer vision system for mobile  
robot, in: David P. Casasent, Ernest L. Hall (eds.), Intelligent Robots  
and Computer Vision XX: Algorithms, Techniques, and Active Vision (Proc.  
Conf. Boston, USA, Oct.28-Nov.2), Pr oc. SPIE, vol. 4572, 2001, 105-114 
 
J.M. Porta and B.J.A. Kröse. Visi on-based localization for mobile  
platforms. In E. Aarts, R. Collie r, E. van Loenen, and B.D. Ruyter,  
editors, Proceedings of the First European Symposium on Ambience  
Intelligence (EUSAI), pages 208-219, Eindhoven, The Netherlands,  
November 2003. Springer. ISBN 3-540-20418-0 
 
Josep M. Porta, Bas Terwijn, and Ben Kröse. Efficient entropy-based  
action selection for appearance-based robot localization. In Proceedings  
of the International Conference on Robotics and Automation ICRA'03,  
pages 2842-2847, Taipei, Taiwan, 2003. ISBN 0-7803-7737-0 
 
 